Sex

Condoms
	Ever so slightly test which way the condom rolls before you slap it on your dick. Seems like a no-brainer, but it's easy to get wrong in the heat of the moment, and can be rather unsafe if you decide to flip it after getting it wrong the first time.
	Put a drop or two of water-based lube on the INSIDE of a condom before you put it on. Despite what you'd think, it does not make it slip off. What it does do is make it suction tighter to your dick and make everything a little warmer, wetter, and better for everyone. If you don't have lube, use spit. EDIT: Make sure you use the right size condom here, fellas. Don't get cocky and use a magnum when you can't fill it out or it will slip off, lube or no lube!

Lube of Champions
	If you're with a partner with whom you needn't worry about STD's or pregnancy (i.e. no condoms or latex products), 
	use organic expeller pressed coconut oil for lube. GOOD LORD. This is a miracle product.
	natural antiseptic so it prevents against UTI's
	tastes great (if you like coconut)
	great for your skin if you get it elsewhere
	doubles as massage oil
	doesn't ever get sticky, stays slippery
	I've have several gal pals tell me they stopped getting yeast infections after using it
	people don't automatically assume it's lube. One time my roommate used mine to make stir fry...ಠ_ಠ

Touching Other People's Junk
	Some of these tips aren't hard and fast (insert Beavis and Butthead laugh), but for most people, they should do the trick very nicely. Also, this is all excluding foreplay. I'm not giving a blow by blow (heh heh), but, rather, listing a few overlooked pointers:
	When performing oral sex on a man:
	hip bones, hip bones, hip bones - bite, suck, kiss, tease. You can virtually bring a man to orgasm from this alone (unless he's so ticklish that it becomes unpleasant)
	if you're having trouble keeping things lubricated because of lack of saliva, choke yourself a little on his dick. Even if you've mastered your gag reflex, just regress for a minute and do it. You'll naturally increase your salivation by a bajillion (that's scientific) from gagging yourself. Plus, let's be frank, it gives him a little ego boost.
	To prolong the erection before ejaculation, press gently but firmly on the perineum (taint or grundle to the layman). You'll know to do this when the testicles start to pull in tighter and close the body. After applying pressure, they should relax a little.
	gently, or not so gently depending on the person, squeezing the base of the shaft will cause blood to pool in the glans or head and increase sensitivity (think of a cock ring)
	expert bonus points unlocked if you alternate between the aforementioned perineum press and the base-camp squeeze to bring him to the verge of orgasm several times without allowing him to climax. Once he's about to die, then let him cum; by that point, you'll basically just have to breathe on it.
	a gentle scalp scratch or hair pulling near the base of the skull is dreamy after orgasm, so give that a go, too
	When performing oral sex on a woman, or about to:
	sometimes it will seem like the woman isn't ready or isn't turned on cause the whole vuvla isn't wet when you reach for the goods. A lot of the time, her natural lubricants get kind of caught behind the fourchette, which is essentially the weenus of the vag. Just dip your finger in the honey pot a little to release the juices. Spread liberally.
	we all appreciate someone who knows his or her way around the clit, but don't go straight for the gold right away. Stomach, thighs, and especially the outer labia. Always with the forgetting the outer labia! This is the essentially the same exact type of skin that's on balls. Like having your balls licked/fondled? Don't forget the outer labia.

Randomness
	pubic hair: if you have it, if they have it, use it as a weapon in your sexy, sexy arsenal. Tug on it, pull on it, play with it, same as you would with the hair on your head (EDIT: as in very gently and sensually. Sheesh, some of the fellas here are big sissies. It's just a fun sensation, not painful.)
	if you notice your partner is repeating a lot of the same moves over and over, 9 times out of 10 it's because he or she wants you to do that to him/her. Biting your earlobes a lot? Do it back! etc.
	for women who have trouble achieving orgasm, try keeping your legs straight and your knees locked while being stimulated. If you have a hard time staying in this position, tell your partner to hold them down. Many women claim this is incredibly helpful. It opens some weird magic orgasm-gate (the presidential scandal)
	don't believe what Cosmo tells you you to do. Don't think that what women pretend is pleasurable in porn is pleasurable in real life. Bottom line is, don't treat your sex partner like a flesh tube. Treat them like a person. Anyone worth your time will return the favor.
	The ultimate theme here is communication. Breathe deep and repeat: communication


For fans of the missionary position: place a pillow or two under her butt/lower back. kinda brings everything into a better alignment.


If she is riding you: 1. make a V with your hand (two fingers on each side, think live long and prosper, yeah Star Trek) 2. situate your hand (palm down, fingers pointing to your toes) on your groin so your penis base touches the sharp of the V. 3. Let her ride you.
Your knuckles will massage her clitoris. If she doesn't feel it you can make a dome with your hand so your knuckles protrude a more.


If you are doing a girl doggie style, lean over, gently reach around, and rub her clit. To girls who like doggie style, this takes it to the next level. Bonus points if you can do this without missing a thrust.
Conversely, I'll (the woman) often reach under and fondle/massage his balls while we're doing it doggy style. He seems to enjoy it!


If you're doing doggy, most girls tend to get in the whole arms-on-the-bed position because it's natural and the position most people assume. Instead, push her up close to a wall (if your bed lies next to one) or the bed frame, so you're both kind of vertical. Keep yourself inside her and then brush her hair to the side of one shoulder and kiss the back of her neck and the other exposed shoulder. Reach around, and keep one hand on her groin / clit depending on your tempo and the mood. Go at it slow, but build your tempo and keep it even over time (Always remember that guys love a huge climax but most girls prefer a slightly smaller increase in tempo but more steady rythm). With most girls I've tried this with it seems to reach different and more pleasurable areas, the clit is far more reachable and easily played with, and you can never ever go wrong with kissing a girls shoulder or neck (particularly the back). I've found you can still get very deep but it's somehow far more intimate than the normal doggy.
Additional note: if she's a bit of a masochist, one hand on the throat creates the force needed to get you both off, and allows you to go at it a lot harder than you normally would ( though you can get the same sort of rythm from one arm around her [with a few fingers over her clit] and one resting on the wall with your weight against her).


So, men, you know how your penis is really sensitive after you climax? Same goes for the clitoris. Just be real gentle afterwards if you're going for multiples.


I have found that the way to a womans heart is to rub her gspot in a circular motion while licking her clitoris in the opposite circular direction. To make it even hotter, go perpendicular to her body,use your other hand/arm to keep her labia spread apart and that arm/elbow on her stomach to keep her pinned down. The key here is keeping her pinned down, because she WILL orgasm, and will try to pull away. Don't let her. Slow down for 20 seconds, leave the clitoris alone, focus on the rest of her prime real estate for a minute, and then go back to the clitoris and gspot. Multiple orgasms every single time.
	I forgot one point...after the 2nd orgasm this way, the clitoris timeout time is better spent tossing thy ole salad. if you're into doing that kind of stuff.


I actually don't like to be fingered while he's going down on me. I really, really love oral and when I'm being fingered it takes away from the intensity of the feeling of the tongue, which is what I love most...Most importantly, ask her what she wants and likes before you 'pin her down'....because if that would happen to me, I wouldn't orgasm, or be a very happy camper.
	How about just insertion, mild pressure, and no movement while being licked? I find it brings the clitoris up just a bit and has worked very well with women who don't like being fingered at all, much less during oral sex. Curious as to your thoughts, science and all that.
		There are certain aspects to fingering that just make me shudder...fingernails, for one. If I can feel a scrape, I'm set all the way back to the beginning. Mild pressure is alright, but I'd rather have mild pressure from a cock.
		And I know every woman is different but some don't need the clitoris to be brought up. I have taught my man where mine is and he knows exactly how to bring me to orgasm with just his tongue, which is just what I prefer.
		Every woman is different. Some hate oral, some love it. Some hate fingering, some love it. Some women don't want anything but a big ole dick. Just ask your lady friend...she'll appreciate the fact that you don't think you know everything and want to please her just right instead of just a generalized aspect of what some women like.
			Oh, I communicate...my concern is mostly with the subset of women that don't like fingering. You're a fairly limited population in my experience and I just don't have any intuitive feel for how to approach handling you. Licking seems to work very well, but the one gal that I spent much time with who didn't like fingers eventually came around on the careful insertion with very light upward pressure in the direction of the G-spot and then zero movement of my hands while my tongue went to work. She preferred a wide-tongue lapping with the tip of the tongue only used to flick her hooded clit as I went past. Very repetitive for me but very effective for her, so I was hoping I might get some additional data or some differing thoughts on what works for gals like her. She's still a good friend and I occasionally hope to hook up with her again so new theories would be grand. She's not terribly sexual or communicative, so she really doesn't care to get into a detailed discussion of what works. Bringing her to the earth-shattering orgasm state is very difficult so I understand why she just doesn't feel like fucking with it most of the time...still...I'd like to get better.
				We're actually not that uncommon. Surely you haven't slept with hundreds to thousands of women? Don't base a generalized assumption on the 5-10 (or 20) women you've encountered. Those women may not have always been open to tell you what the wanted or like I used to be, too shy to tell you where they want it.
				For me, I don't like the constant lapping of the tongue. I'm more of a slow, drawing the tongue up the vulva with a nice tease and then give the attention to the clit. But, too much attention, especially too hard and rough makes it so sensitive that I can't stand it. Slow circles, closing your lips around it in a sort of O shape while you suck gently at the clit. And alternate those moves with quick laps of the tongue. If she likes being fingered, mimic the movements of the tongue with the finger...don't have one going like a jack hammer while the other is slow.
				To me, an orgasm is something that has to be drawn out. Too much stimulation too quick and hard is going to scare it away. Slow, deliberate, movements that increase with her reaction (trust me, I think you know if what you're doing is working...hair pulling, hips bucking, legs shaking). Move with her and react off of her. Her body will tell you exactly what you're doing is right. If she's not moving at all....it may be a good time to ask her what she wants specifically.
				I get where she's coming from though. Before I met the man I am with now, earth shattering orgasms just didn't happen. I had little sputters that I could really accomplish on my own and never saw a need for it. But with my husband, I have G-spot orgasms every time and he can make me come with his mouth in probably less than a minute.
				That being said, sometimes girls want a good, raw fucking...but in my experience, if they want that they'll be the one ripping the clothes off of you and initiating oral for you ;) Which is another subject entirely.
					My numbers are somewhere a little North of one hundred. I've only met three that aren't into heavy use of fingers, i.e. either the jack hammer or extra fingers and drawing the cervix up with a lot of pressure against the abdomen...either fast movements or deep, almost painful pressure. All of them like light teasing licking initially and most like a little change-up during oral with some of that light flickign or just light brushing of the tongue past the clit, but eventually get into heavier use of either the broad surface of the tongue/tip or hard sucking/tongue flicking inside the mouth/even biting.
					The girls I'm talking about don't tend to respond to much, though if you're carefully listening to breathing they'll speed up a bit. They do like sex, but not digital penetration...orgasm during sex is generally achievable but also difficult even though they may respond very well to penetration with a penis and enjoy it very much.
					Note that I've met many women/girls who will say that they don't like fingers or oral or whatever, but once you play with them a while they'll change their mind, they just haven't had someone touch them while paying attention and/or knowing what they're doing. I lived with a lesbian who would grab me for oral once in a while because I "licked like a woman and knew what to do with my hands" with hard instructions about what would happen to me if her girlfriend ever found out she messed around with a man. Sex was my hobby for many years and I'm simply don't understand what to do with these few women, it's irritating, especially because of the one that's still a good friend (which means I think about it more than I would otherwise). I'm well versed in the normal reactions that a woman gives when she's having a good time, including holding her breath or legs quietly locking up slowly.
					Note that these three girls didn't usually want a good raw fucking, except when drunk or otherwise in an adjusted mental state (one could be woken from a deep sleep and respond with feral interest). This led me to believe it was mostly mental, and one did respond well to being blindfolded, orgasming much easier from oral and actually making some noises. Even with that expectation it doesn't help if I just don't have a feel for the sorts of things that get a girl like that going to the finish line. They're perfectly happy to get naked but I hate having to get them fucked up every time I want to get them off really hard.

If she has some difficulty acchieving orgasm during intercourse, a little bullet vibrator pressed in the clitoral area during penetration gives her some of the best orgasms she could have in her life.
Guys, don't think the little vibe will replace you. The bullet vibe doesn't have the size to stimulate inside the vagina. The cock makes this function, very well, while the vibe makes something that your penis doesn't do: it vibrates. Your girl will never refuse both your cock and the vibe together.


The best way to find the gspot is to have the woman lay on her back. Insert your middle and index fingers, and press them against the front wall. Do the "come hither" motion until you feel a small spongy spot, with ridges, about the size of a coin. It will feel similar to the top of your mouth. Focus on this area while lightly increasing pressure and speed. Most women will reach orgasm very quickly this way. Also, any position where you can hit this spot directly will make her instantly moan.
	Don't forget to apply light pressure on her stomach, right above where your fingers on the inside are, for added intensity.
		That was my favorite sex "hack" with my ex. While in missionary I'd spread my knees and kneel upright, then while thrusting, place my fingers on her stomach to push her G-spot down while I thrusted up adding extra pressure, and simultaneously used my thumb to rub her clit. Near INSTANT orgasm.
	While I mostly agree with your technique, several previous Reddit discussions have pointed out that the fabled G-spot is not really that easy to find. In fact, what is really happening is there is a "ring" of nerves surrounding the vaginal barrel (deep in the muscle tissue), and it is different for some women as to the place & manner this collection of nerves senses stimulation. My first girlfriend was fantastically sensitive to the technique you describe, and it doesnt work at all for my wife. Same guy, same technique, but different women equals different results.
		True. My exgirlfriend was a similar situation to what you describe. But for the women that I have located the Gspot on, this technique has worked extremely well. Although, it is very difficult to even get doctors to agree that it exists as many feel that it is merely an extension of the clitoris and the rest wraps around the vaginal opening. Which reminds me of another technique. If you are in missionary position try to enter at the lowest angle possible so that your penis applies pressure to the lower part of her vagina. It will feel good for both.
			I saw an explanation on Reddit which actually shows how the clitoris is just a tiny exposed nub of sensitive nerves, which then extends back into the deeper muscle tissue, going all the way around the vaginal barrel to form a "ring". So, the G-spot is really a sensitive area, but not the mythical magic button as it sounds like. The girlfriend I mentioned had very little muscle between this "ring" and my inserted finger, so she would orgasm so hard she didnt know she was screaming. I thought I was a sex GOD. Sadly, the exact same thing makes my wife feel like she needs to pee.
				Some women don't need you to be gentle. While you are going down on her, when she starts to orgasm, use those two fingers and pull against her 'gspot' like you are trying to start a lawn mower (or chainsaw, or whatever you prefer to imagine) - the point is pull pretty damn hard. It's worked for me.


oral on female: sucking clitoris and flicking it with tongue at same time. My husband is a master at this and it makes me cum so hard.


if you're going down on a girl and she's close to coming, put your tongue on her clit and shake your head back and forth from side to side (sounds goofy I know). What this does is puts extra speed on it (like when you're fapping and you're right about to cum and you start speeding up your hands) and it's great.
I'd also recommend always using your hands when going down on a girl too. Sounds obvious but I suppose not everyone would think to do that. What I do is start fingering and then kiss my way down, hitting all the major spots like nips, stomach, thighs, then put my mouth on the clit/clit area while continuing to go in and out with my fingers, sometimes going in and wiggling them up and down to get the gspot.
Just don't be too aggressive too quickly.


Instead of focusing all of your attention on the G-Spot, massage her A-Spot.
The full name is the Anterior Fornix Erogenous Zone. This erogenous zone is responsible for female lubrication. As we all know, this happens without any stimulation directly on that spot. However, when it IS stimulated, you'll be in for quite a treat.
The A-Spot is located at the deepest part (aout 4 to 4.5 inches or your entire middle finger, depending on how long it is) of the vagina right above the cervix. For the best results, apply pressure to the area, use a scooping motion (like the "come hither" motion for the G-Spot, but with longer strokes), and stimulate the clitoris.
The last time I did this for my lady, my hand was completely drenched in her lubrication. My hand was literally dripping. I suggest keeping a few towels around. =P
Also, if you really want to impress your lady, after she orgasms, ground her. No, don't send her into a corner and tell her to think about what she's done...
This technique is called grounding. It's a way to ease your lady out of her orgasm and give her a sense of closure. Guys, when you orgasm, does your lady (or your hand) just stop then and there? No. She strokes it out a little bit more, or if you're lucky, she'll suck you off until you tell her to stop. Women need that too.
What you do is take one hand (preferably your dominant hand) and place it on her vagina. Make sure you cover everything, from opening to clitoris. Take your other hand and place it on her pubic bone. Interlock your fingers and apply firm pressure with both hands (push down on pubic bone and push up on vagina). Let your lady guide you and tell you how firm she wants it. All you have to do is apply pressure and let her ease herself out of the orgasm. She might want to grind on your hand, she might just want to stay still for a bit. Whatever she does, just keep the pressure on until she says you can let go.
I learned this little trick from a book called "The 4-Hour Body: An Uncommon Guide to Rapid Fat-Loss, Incredible Sex, and Becoming Superhuman" by Timothy Ferriss. I suggest you pick up a copy of this book. Quality stuff in there :)


For the guys: BE VOCAL DURING SEX! If a woman doesn't know you're enjoying how they are making you feel, chances are it will keep them from climaxing and possibly keep them from wanting to have sex as often as you'd like to. Just because you cum at the end doesn't mean she knew you were enjoying yourself. You can cum masturbating, it's not the same. Being vocal is not silly to a girl, and during sex you should both be as comfortable as possible making your noises. If you don't make noise you will make her feel uncomfortable making noises, which, as we all know, is a major turn on.
Guys, your voice is one of the strongest, underused weapons in your arsenal. It's also one of the most dangerous. Used with proper context and cooing (and position), your voice and words can turn the most casual hand on her stomach into 90% of the work towards an orgasm. Used incorrectly it makes you sound like a creepy, unconfident, oversexed perv. :)
Stand behind her and just place your hand on her stomach (or whatever sexual middle ground area she may have that's in reach) and keep it there. Put your mouth about an inch away from halfway between her ear and the nape of her neck (this is different for everyone so listen and feel for the reaction) Talk in fluctuation between just above a whisper and not quite to full voice taking fairly liberal advantage of pregnant pauses for emphasis and describe to her, in colorful (but not too graphic) detail about all the things you could do with that hand.
Do this with measured confidence. Don't talk about shit you don't know or aren't prepared to do. Be comfortable and committed to what you say. They'll smell the fake a mile away. Let this sink in for a couple of minutes. Her body language or even her verbal language will let you know if you are on the right path. If she seems responsive to it, she may at some point try to make you do some of those wondrous things you promised. Now this is going to be the hard part....but don't give in just yet. Deny her this simple request. Deny her this with all the playful, sexual confidence you can muster out of you. (see second paragraph for tone of voice tips) "Not just yet" "Oh, we'll get to that but I wasn't quite done yet." "I don't know if you've earned it yet" or even a nice long drawn out "noooooo" (confidence confidence confidence) If you haven't learned this yet, a little playful denial with a woman goes a long way.
Note: If it doesn't seem to be working, DON'T GET ALL APOLOGETIC AND BITCHY. Just mentally acknowledge the setback and proceed as you normally would and if she has feedback on what she liked or didn't like about it, don't get all butthurt and pay fucking attention to it. Thus armed with your new-found information, adapt your style accordingly and give it a go next time.
You may choose to "rinse and repeat" this part of the cycle. Some girls like a lot of buildup and denial...some don't. It's a case by case basis and can usually be figured out through a healthy amount of communication before and after.
When you eventually give in to her demands (and you will) remember one thing. This isn't foreplay...this is fore-foreplay. In most cases this is not carte blanche to skip straight to the boom boom. (though you may, depending on what you talked about) You should always be prepared to proceed to foreplay after this. And, while most of the concepts transfer well to that (good communication, confident teasing pauses, etc...) I will leave that to someone else.
Good luck, motherfuckers. Half the fun is trying.


- Just swallow. I never understood why people run to the bathroom with a mouth full of man seed after a BJ -- it only makes the taste stay in your mouth on your taste buds longer than necessary. Just swallow it asap and the taste fades quickly.
- Don't expect your gag reflex to be 100% perfect out of the gate. If giving a BJ, start off slow -- taking a little bit at a time. After a few minutes, your gag reflexes become less sensitive and you're able to take more and more without discomfort.
- If your partner has a rhythm problem, make love to music -- it can help them find a beat. And if you want, compiling a "sexy-time playlist" can make for a fun couple project.
- Lavender oils can help someone if they are sexually nervous or tense. Start off with a soft shoulder or back massage with the oils to help ease the tension before sexy-times.
- Ladies, urinate shortly after foreplay or intercourse. Bacteria can be forced up our urethra after sexy-times and may cause a UTI.
- Pineapple juice may make a man's ejaculate taste better, but so does most foods that are high in citric acid.
- If you want to do anal but are not very experienced or have apprehensions, just do it in the shower where cleanup is a no-brainer and not a concern.
- Anal can be painful and dangerous if you're not careful. If it's new, start of slow with a finger or small toy and work your way up. Remember to use lots of lube to prevent tearing or hemorrhoids.
- Ladies, wear socks to help orgasm. I don't remember the study, but some Dutch scientists found women are more likely to orgasm if their feet are warm and comfortable.
- Tickle the tailbone. In mid-coitus, if you gently rub or stroke a woman's tailbone with a finger (just above her buttocks), her muscles may contract and she'll feel a slight electric sensation in her pelvis which may help her to climax.


Do missionary, put your dick in, and now for some angle adjustments. Crawl up farther on top of her, so that as you are moving up her body, your dick is still inside, gradually becoming perpendicular with the ground. Go until your penis is inside, but the entire top part is making contact with the insides of the labia minora, the clit, and the clit hood. The roof of your penis should be pressed firmly up against the entire length of her vag. Now start humping. There should be absolute constant friction contact all over her clit and sensitive inside lips. Try to move gracefully, without letting up, almost like a violin player is constantly moving the bow even though it may change direction of movement. Make long strokes, don't be that guy who thinks he's the master because he can hump like a rabbit on crank, speed isn't what you should strive for. What you really need to strive for is continuous stimulation without breaks or hiccups. Keep the pressure on there(not too hard), and pull your dick out with each stroke until just half of the glans is inside. The ribbed nature of the glans provides additional stimulation, use this to your advantage. The constant clitoral stimulation will get them off in no time.
I regularly make my girlfriend cum 6 times in a single sex session(about 15 minutes). I've done it with every other girl as well, so it's not something weird about my girl. Secondly, most girls I've been with squirt, and most of those girls claim to have never done it before, or that they used to think they weren't capable of doing it. Seriously, this is the most useful tip that I know of, and it will seriously carry you a long way. Being good at sex is a very handy skill.
	Say things you like about them, what you find sexy, the texture of her skin (where), the scent, you can wait to wreck that nice hair style, moan (if you mean it) when you touch areas that turn you on too, ravish her with words/sounds! You like to grab her hips, tell her, them pull her into you from behind and demonstrate confidently. So many ways... women are auditorily aroused like men are visually. It's a power! If it's authentic, it will be heaven for her. Don't fake it, don't make things up. Be real. (edited for vowel movement)


If you're going down on a chick, and when you first get down there you discover the odor is more than you can take, you can salvage the situation quite simply.
Insert your thumb into the vagina, spread you first and middle fingers around the clitoris, like you're giving the peace sign to her pubic bone, and press firmly enough to get a good seal.
This keeps the smell contained, and you're basically just licking between your two fingers.


For men who want to interest their partner in anal play: Create a connection between anal stimulation and pleasure. Don't just jam it in there.
While going down on her, finger her pussy while tonguing away at her clit. Let that wet finger slip down further. Circle, tease, play. Test the waters. Is she responding positively? Go for something akin to the shocker: index finger in the front door, middle finger (you got it good and wet first, yes?) in the back door. Push in a little, wait, push in a little, wait. Slide out some, push back in. Build up some speed. Hopefully she's hanging onto you by your ears and coming like a freight train by now. Stick with this for a few times, her response is your guide.
Once this is an established way of having fun, when you're in both and she begins to come, slide the index finger out of her pussy. Now she's coming with you only in her ass. After a few times, move up to two fingers. You're not far from her groaning like a wounded water buffalo when you circle the head of your cock against her asshole.
Note, this could take five minutes to five years, depending on your partner's attitudes about such things. Make it insanely hot for her instead of painful, and it'll be, well, insanely hot. My wife has her own signal now; if I get a handjob with lots of lube during foreplay, the back door is open for business.


When thrusting as a male, pull a semi-random sequence:
- 9 mini (short) thrusts, 1 hard (deep)
- 8 mini (short) thrusts , 2 hard (deep)
- 7 mini (short) thrusts, 3 hard....etc
When you hit one, reroll from the top, but go faster (i.e. shorten the time between thrusts).
I have yet to find a girl that didn't find this at least moderately pleasurable.


While riding on top, learn to figure eight with your hips and nothing else. And not just figure 8 horizontally, but vertically too. It takes a hell of a lot of thigh strength and stamina, but holy god it makes for a good time.


Guys: If you're in a live-in or cohabitating arrangement, remember that sex starts outside of the bedroom. Not joking: 1. Make her dinner, do the dishes, clean the kitchen. Watch her blossom. 2. If you've exhausted your domestic abilities with the kitchen move, on a different day, you can catch up the laundry (yes, folded and put away too). Her surge of tender feelings and general sense of being cherished and cared for will make her your little sex kitten. And, Free Bonus, with practice, you can make any of these simple tasks Pavlovian triggers for an evening of le sexy time. Yes, Sex On Demand is as close as a laundry basket or dish towel.


Give her at LEAST one orgasm manually or orally before going at it. There is nothing as hot as having sex when she is all worked up ... plus it makes the whole encounter longer and makes you appear to be a sex god in her eyes.
	That's not going to work for all women. I'm a girl and the second I am done orgasming I become completely uninterested, even disgusted with sex and I become dry as a bone very quickly.


Well, here goes. I'm not sure about how hard this skill is to acquire, I kinda stumbled on it. It will likely require a bit of masturbation for the guys out there. I know, bummer, right?
Basically, those same muscles that are used to ejaculate (think those that are pulsating when you shoot your load) can be controlled if you focus hard enough and practice a bit. What that means is orgasm without ejaculation.
Allow me to elaborate. When you practice this by yourself, the second you reach orgasm and those muscles tense up, use ALL your willpower to keep them TENSE as SHIT. Don't let them pulsate. The first contraction NEEDS to be your last.
After about 5-10 seconds after the urge to have those muscles pulse is gone, your penis is left in a very, VERY sensible state, but still hard. Start pumping that bad boy. You'll get your next orgasm within seconds. Then perhaps your third will come too.
The bottom line here is by taking control of those muscles you'll be able to have multiple orgasms AND never go flaccid. There's no down time after you orgasm because you never ejaculated. Your penis will soften up a tiny bit after your first orgasm, but it'll come right back to it's throbbing glory after the second one.
Try it. Kiss your "I can't last more than 5 minutes..." problems GOOD BYE.


Two tips for men, one for making girls riding cowgirl more pleasurable. The other is how to 'train' your partner in bettering their oral sex skills by providing 'goals'.
1) As a male, if you're laying down and your partner is riding cowgirl - you can increase her sensation of being penetrated by not inserting yourself completely. You can do this by just inserting the tip of your penis into her and instructing her to ride just that much, however you'll find most women will unconsciously take it deeper as it feels better.
There's a handy hand-trick you can do to take some control over how much she can take:
- Take your hands and place them palm up, thumbs extended out at a right angle to the rest of your fingers.
- Now turn your hands inward, so your thumbs point straight in the air, and your fingers are pointing forward.
- Place your hands in this position on your hips. When your partner lowers herself down on your penis, her inner thigh will reach your hands and stop her from being able to take more. In addition to physically preventing her from taking more, it gives her a boundary to play within. She can ride just the inch or two you've given her and take immense pleasure from it.
- Here's where it gets fun: after a little bit of not letting her take more than just the tip of your penis, decide when she gets more. When she lifts herself up, angle your hands a little bit inward so the tops of your fingers drop a bit lower. When she lowers herself down, she'll expect to hit your hands...but they wont be there. She'll continue sliding down until she feels your hands. Since she has only been receiving just the tip, even an additional inch or two will feel GREAT for her.
You can play around with this to give her surprising sensations, such as moving your hands completely so when she lowers herself down she gets a lot more than she was used to for the last few minutes ;)
2) This next trick is great for both experienced and inexperienced partners. Much like using your hand in the suggestion above, you can do the same thing during oral sex. Lets say your partner is going down on you, and you'd like her to take it deeper. You could be aggressive about it with a consenting partner, but that's less enjoyable and more often causes the partner giving you oral sex to tense up, meaning she likely won't be able to take as much.
Instead, you can play a 'game' where you train your partner into taking your penis as far as you permit. It starts by having your partner close her eyes (optional), you wrapping your thumb and forefinger just an inch or two under your head, and you ask her to take it into her mouth until her lips reach your fingers.
If you make the goal easy enough by putting your fingers close to your head, she may have a sense of completion or victory. Keep your fingers in the same spot, and she'll start focusing just on the tip far more, since that's all she'll be permitted to work with. You'll find that your partner will use a lot more tongue and explore the amount given a bit more.
Just like the first suggestion, when she pulls her head back you can move your fingers just about an inch lower. When she lowers her head, she'll easily reach the first point you set and continue taking it until your next finger position. It's rewarding to 'complete' this task, so be realistic to your partner and place your fingers in a position she can reach (unless you're really pushing limits).
You can play with this to find out exactly what your partners deepthroating limits are in a very passive, friendly, fun-for-everyone way. I'm a bit on the larger side and this is the most effective method I've found to get even the most shy girls to realize how how much they are able to take orally.
The plus side is this method works even for experienced partners. In a more dom/sub scenario you can set your limits much farther, preferably just a hair past what she's able to take, and watch her struggle to succeed ;)


