EXERCISE

STRENGTH
- bicep curl
- tricep curl
- vuelo lateral, oblicuo, frontal
- bodyweight squats
- sentadilla
- sentadilla de fuerza
- pushups
- pullups
- chinups
- ab crunches
- ab crunches lifting legs
- hip thrust
- rkc planks
- jumping jacks
- burpees

STRETCH

muscle tone

METHOD 1

Equate muscle movement to muscle tone.

Some age-related atrophy begins at age 20. This means you will need to work a
little harder as you age to keep the muscle you already have.

Start with a whole-body exercise. Trade in walking, cycling or rowing for
swimming, elliptical machines, yoga or a cardio burn class. A whole body workout
will improve allover muscle tone more than one that only targets your upper or
lower body.

Adults should be doing 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise throughout the
week and strength training at least twice per week to develop healthy muscle
tone.

Increase your workouts to four or five days per week. A recent study found that
“chronic” or frequent exercise prevented muscle loss and preserved lean muscle
mass in adults.

METHOD 2

Aim to do strength training two to three times per week with a day of rest in
between. Keep this up consistently to improve tone in your muscles. Extra muscle
tone and strength will also help to burn excess fat.

Your aim is to reach muscle fatigue, where you can’t do another rep, after two
sets of 10 repetitions. Add or subtract weight in order to reach this goal.

Strength training to muscle fatigue will not build bulky muscles. Instead, it
will strengthen your muscles and improve resting tone.

Give preference to dynamic, compound exercises over single motions. For example,
a squat can require you to use of your legs, hips, buttocks, abs and arms, while
bicep curls only work your arms. The more muscle groups you use, the better.

Incorporate body weight exercises into the workout. Include at least planks and push-ups.

    To do a plank, get on your hands and knees. Move your feet back so you are
    balanced between your prone feet and hands. Ensure there is a straight line
    between your ankles and head. Contract your stomach muscles deeply and hold
    the position for 30 seconds to one minute. If you can’t hold for 30 seconds,
    work in 15-second increments.

    To do pushups, get on your hands and knees. Move your feet back into a plank
    position. Bend your elbows and lower your chest toward the ground. Move
    slowly and deliberately with your abs contracted the whole time. Do two sets
    of 10 repetitions.

    With either exercise, you can modify into a knee-plank, where you rest your
    knees on the ground and lift your ankles up. Create a straight line between
    knees and head.

    To decrease the weight on your wrists, grasp a hexagonal dumbbell under each
    hand.

    To decrease the weight on your shoulders, rest your upper body on your
    forearms, instead of your palms.

Stretch after each weight training session.

Increase the effectiveness of your muscle-building regimen by eating a protein-
filled snack after each strength-training session. Eat plenty of fresh fruit,
vegetables and lean proteins daily.
