FITNESS:
  fundamental four:
      strength: how much you can lift once
      power: how much you can lift quickly
      mass: how big you are
      endurance: how many repetitions you can do

  As for your training sessions themselves, the number one thing to remember
  is that each of the Fundamental Four responds to a different number of
  repetitions per set. Lift a weight so heavy you can lift it only once,
  you’re building strength (and, oddly, not much mass); lift a weight you can
  move six to 12 times, you’re building mass (and, oddly, a little less pure
  strength); ease up to a weight you can lift 50 times, and you’re working
  muscular endurance (which is great for endurance sports but tends to
  undermine the first three, shrinking your strength, power, and muscle size).

  The only other thing you really need to understand is how our bodies respond
  to training. First: The human body adapts to stress. Throw us in ice-cold
  water every day and we’ll sprout subcutaneous fat for insulation; expose us
  to the desert sun and our skin will darken. What this means for getting in
  shape is that each week, you have to stress your body a little more than
  last time — lift a little heavier, run a little harder. Muscles weaken with
  exhaustion after a workout, but then they recover and typically, a few days
  later, go into what’s known as “supercompensation,” a fancy word that just
  means bouncing back a little stronger than before. Soon afterward the muscle
  fades back to normal again. Work a muscle too soon after the last time you
  worked it, before the muscle completely recovers, and it’ll get even weaker
  than before. If you work a muscle too late, after that supercompensation
  effect fades, you’ll just keep returning to your baseline.
  So the whole trick to athletic training — and this is true for everybody
  from bodybuilders to marathoners to noncompetitive athletes just in it for
  health, or even vanity — is timing each subsequent workout so it hits the
  middle of that so-called supercompensation peak, when a muscle has already
  bounced back even stronger than before but hasn’t yet returned to baseline.

  jumping squats 15 secs
  side to side pushups 15 secs
  towel rows 15 secs
  towel squat + raise 15 secs
  half burpees
  rest 60 secs


* Lying on the floor, exhale completely, forcing all the air out of the lungs/
  diaphragm with your abdominal muscles. Next, instead of inhaling, suck in your
  gut, pulling it in so far that you can imagine your abs actually touching your
  spine. Since there's no air in your lungs, you should be able to suck your
  stomach way in, which will contract your transversus abdominis.

* Practice holding this vacuum for longer and longer periods of time.
  Eventually, your waist will get smaller, providing you don't stuff yourself at
  meals and bloat with massive amounts of liquids between meals.

* The idea is to keep the waistline tight, under control. Eat smaller meals, and
  don't ingest as much food at each feeding, which will prevent unwanted stomach
  distention.

* Using this technique, I find myself sipping water more often throughout the
  day instead of bloating my gut with big meals and large gulps of beverages.

* If you want to develop endurance--that is, the ability to maintain a vacuum
  for longer periods of time--as well as a muscular waistline, it will all come
  down to breath control.

* After you have achieved a sense of control in the lying position, next
  practice the standing position. Initially, it will be easier to achieve the
  vacuum if you press your palms against your upper thighs after exhaling and
  sucking in your gut.

* The final step in doing the ultimate vacuum is to start practicing with your
  hands behind your neck, which is what T used to do at competitions to good
  effect. This particular vacuum ain't easy, but keep at it.

VACUUM TIPS

1. The basics of the stomach vacuum are the same whether performed lying,
   kneeling or standing. Reduce the load on your intervertebral discs and facet
   joints by maintaining a neutral lumbar position.

2. Exhale. Suck in your gut, which will cause a contraction of the transversus
   abdominis.

3. Maintain each muscle contraction for 10 to 20 seconds.

4. Begin with the lying stomach vacuum and progress over time to the standing,
   sitting and, finally, kneeling variations. If you have significant excess
   abdominal mass (a.k.a a pot belly), do only the standing version, as the more
   advanced forms may be uncomfortable.

5. For best results, incorporate one to three sets of 10 to 15 repetitions three
   nonconsecutive days per week.
