BREATHING

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_of_ventilation

I've been a big fan of the WHM and the breathing but looking further into it, the decreased CO2 levels in your body cause a restriction in the blood vessels in your brain that reduce the level of oxygen in your brain.

Needless to say, that doesn't sound great. Also explains the tingly feelings and light headedness. Is this something that could cause you brain damage? Low oxygen in the brain sounds like a pretty good way to debilitate yourself. How unsafe are these levels of oxygen?

Just trying to get pointed in the right direction in regards to some research on the topic, as studies I've found describing this speak to its effect on blood pressure, not specifically dangers. I know free divers don't recommend hyperventilation because they can pass out, but is this ok if you're not in danger of drowning?

-----

I'm not an expert, but here's how I understand it.

This hyperventilating induces hypocacnia - low CO2.

The body cannot measure O2. But it can infer O2 levels by means of measuring CO2. It keeps these two things balanced normally. CO2 low: inhale, CO2 high: exhale.

So, when CO2 is blown off intentionally, via hyperventilation, the body assumes O2 is low as well! But it's not. This is the "trick."

Because of this, the body wants the inhalation response to happen. So it takes all the O2 currently in the blood (it not knowing how much there is, assuming there's too little), and keeps it sequestered in the blood, and temporarily away from the body's organs (this is lightheadedness), in the hopes that it'll compel you to inhale, until CO2 builds up in the blood again from normal processes (the lightheadedness fades).

So you inhale once CO2 re-elevates. Your body's confused, and forces an inhalation response. But now, after a big inhalation and hold, extra O2 is pulled into the blood, and the blood is again both very CO2-rich and O2-rich. The blood was already full of O2 to begin with (remember, it was sequestered), and now there's more O2, plus more CO2. So now the blood shunts all the O2 into the organs and brain, effectively "hyper-oxygenizing" the brain and vessels, with higher-than-normal amounts. Remember, the body cannot transport O2 into cells without CO2! CO2 is not simply a waste product, it's needed.

This does a few things: 1. Introduces a slight hormetic stressor (like exercise) that temporarily raises cortisol (which resets the body's stress tolerance, by means of controlled acute stressors). 2. Hyperoxygenates the body, and 3. Trains the body to be comfortable with elevated CO2 levels (like when happens under heavy exercise load and so on), which improves cardiovascular function over time, by resetting O2/CO2 balance to a higher, more saturated value (similar to training in high altitudes).

Something like that. My explanation isn't perfect, and I'm sure I'll be corrected.
