How To Beat Procrastination (Backed by Science)

One of my favorite quotes about procrastination is from Abraham Lincoln:
    “You cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today.”

we all know that it’s harmful.
And research shows exactly that: When you procrastinate, you might feel better on the short-term, but you will suffer in the long-term.

 the cost of procrastination. It is related to:

    Depression
    Irrational beliefs
    Low self-esteem
    Anxiety
    Stress

Procrastination is not innocent behavior. It’s a sign of poor self-regulation.

To me, the key finding from the study by Dianne Tice and Roy Baumeister is this:

    “The present evidence suggests that procrastinators enjoy themselves rather than working at assigned tasks, until the rising pressure of imminent deadlines forces them to get to work. In this view, procrastination may derive from a lack of self-regulation and hence a dependency on externally imposed forces to motivate work.”

Self-regulation, self-control, willpower, are all things that we overestimate.

Willpower Doesn’t Work. Systems Do.

What you really need is a system for doing work. A lot of people shy away from routines, systems and frameworks because they want to have “freedom.”

I’m sorry to disappoint you: Freedom is your enemy.

The fact is that, if you want to get things done, you need rules.

What are some things that research proved to be effective?

    Self-imposed deadlines.
    Accountability systems (commitment with friends, or a coach).
    Working/studying in intervals.
    Exercising 30 minutes a day.
    A healthy diet.
    Eliminating distractions.
    And most importantly: Internal motivation.

If you combine the right productivity tactics, you have a productivity system.

The deadlines create urgency, accountability will create responsibility, working in intervals improves your focus, exercising will give you more energy, so does a healthy diet, and eliminating distractions will take away the temptations.

But there’s no system that can help you if you don’t have an inner drive. People overcomplicate that concept, but it’s simple: Why do you do what you do?

