Introduction

Significant lifestyle change can be very difficult to initiate and even more 
difficult to maintain over the long haul. the mental, psychological and 
emotional barriers that must be overcome are often subtle yet powerful enough 
to overwhelm the best short-term intervention. These internal, personal 
barriers must be identified and addressed head-on to realize the goal of a 
long-term healthy lifestyle change. A key to success in this effort is mental 
discipline.

The term mental discipline refers to the ability to recognize and respond 
wisely to thoughts and feelings occurring within the mind and body. Without the 
skill of mindful observation, or "Mindfulness" automatic reactive patterns of 
thinking and perceiving, along with their associated emotional charge capture 
the mind's attention. One's internal experience flows from where the attention 
is directed and old habits of behavior, perhaps the very ones that have led to 
current health problems, are unwittingly encouraged and supported. Mindfulness 
can break the hold of these destructive patterns, and the freed energy can then 
be used to firmly establish any recently learned and still fragile health 
promoting habits.

Mindfulness is a skill that is easily learned and strengthened over time. It is 
utilized by a host of performing artists and sports figures, and has proven 
itself useful in overcoming the difficult challenges of alcoholism, chronic 
pain and major depression. Developing the habit of mindfulness will be helpful 
both in integrating the material offered in this lifestyle modification program 
and in putting this information to work in everyday life.

So, what is mindfulness? In the most straight forward terms, mindfulness is 
being present with whatever is occurring to us or within us at any given 
moment. It is being present with what is in the now, not our perceptions, our 
judgments or our comments about what is happening; just what is happening with 
no elaborations, no overlay of judgment or commentary. It is being present with 
the endless flow of change in our life without becoming lost in reactivity. 
After only a few minutes of silent, motionless sitting, we can see clearly that 
mindfulness is not our ordinary state of mind.

As we continue to sit quietly, we can observe the mind chase after this 
thought, that sensation, then on to the next bit of stimulation or feeling that 
arises. Reacting endlessly to the pleasant or unpleasant feelings associated 
with what is occurring in the moment, the mind grows more unmanageable and 
controlling of our attention. And along with our attention, we lose control of 
our inner experience (the only experience we have). We begin to see that what 
occurs in our mind is out of our control. It's as if the mind has a mind of its 
own! With this loss of control comes more anxiety and fear, which only fuels 
the mind's wildness and habits of behavior we've come to associate with it.

The good news is we can systematically tame the mind and as we do, we move into 
a seat of quiet, mindful observation. And with observation comes the ability to 
shift from reactivity to response; we can choose our next move rather than 
simply reacting in our old conditioned way. We must cultivate a strong 
intention if we are to make mindfulness our natural, habitual way of being in 
the world. The development of this powerful skill requires determination and a 
balance of strict discipline and gentle kindness toward ourselves.

The practice of meditation is a powerful tool for the development of 
mindfulness. Meditation is not a religion, although it is a practice found in 
some form among most of the world religions including Christianity and 
Buddhism. Meditation in its most simple form is focusing on any one thing while 
trying to exclude all others, working to still the mind's jumping from one 
thing to another. During sitting meditation, for example, we first make a 
commitment not to move for a stated period of time, 20 minutes let's say. Then 
we begin to settle the mind using a concentration exercise, such as counting 
the inhalation and exhalation of the breath by focusing on the touch sensation 
at the tip of the nostrils. We notice when the attention is with the breath and 
when it is not. When it drifts away, we bring our attention back to the touch 
sensation of the breath over and over again, without judgment or self criticism 
for having drifted. The mind begins to settle and with sustained effort becomes 
responsive to our direction.

As the mind continues to settle down, we begin to gain control over where we 
are placing our attention. With this focused attention, we can apply the 
tremendous power of the mind to the task of establishing and maintaining 
healthy and wise lifestyle choices.

You may ask, "Where am I supposed to find time to practice mindfulness?" In our 
hectic day-to-day lives, the last thing we want is one more thing on our 
"To-do" list. Being overbooked is likely a major contributor to our current 
health and lifestyle problems and not a habit to encourage. While taking 15 or 
20 minutes a couple of times a day to sit quietly can be very helpful, it's not 
always reasonable given the other demands we face. We need to fit this practice 
into our lives so that it doesn't feel like a burden. We can do this by using 
some of our normal activities as the training ground for developing this skill. 
No expensive gym, fancy equipment or extra time is necessary, just an intention 
to focus more deeply, pay closer attention to some of the activities we're 
doing already. Pick one or two daily activities such as eating, walking or 
standing and make them activities for strengthening your mental muscle of 
mindfulness.

Our eating habits are a natural choice for the development of mindfulness given 
that we are encouraged to eat more slowly and to pay attention to the food 
choices we make anyway. In what can be thought of as "eating meditation" we 
take the process of eating as our object of mindful observation (as we take the 
breath in sitting meditation). Watch the unfolding process: moving the hand to 
the fork, moving the fork to the plate, lifting the bite of food to the mouth, 
beginning to chew, experiencing the tastes and the textures that arise as you 
eat. There's a lot going on with just that first bite, and we try to observe it 
all. As in the sitting meditation, we keep coming back to the process on which 
we are focusing, we keep bringing the awareness back to the eating process 
whenever the attention drifts.

As we become more mindful of the process of eating, we come to notice flavors, 
textures and colors we may have missed before. As we focus our attention to 
observe our eating more closely, we naturally chew more thoroughly, promoting 
better digestion. Also, the sensation of being full is noticed after eating 
less food. Because we are paying attention, looking out for this very important 
signal arising in our body, we're less likely to overeat. The food choices we 
are making begin to stand out more clearly and we're also less likely to "slip" 
and eat something we're trying to avoid.

Eating in silence especially with others who understand the value of this 
activity, is a powerful exercise which allows much deeper penetration into the 
experience of eating. Of course, if the intention is to connect strongly with 
our food, we must resist the urge to watch TV, listen to music, read the 
newspaper, or carry on a conversation (especially about disturbing topics) 
during meals. This is a tall order given that many of our meals tend to be 
business or social functions that "require" conversation. We can only do the 
best we can in a given situation. Deepening our skill of mindful observation 
does not mean being rude or offensive. Whenever there's an opportunity to eat 
silently, we can take it. Ask your partner, family and friends to join you from 
time to time in a silent meal; they might enjoy this experience too.

Our intention to eat in a more healthy manner is supported by observing 
ourselves doing just that, slowly eating, focused on one bite at a time. As we 
keep our promises to our self, we have less guilt and self-blame to fuel the 
old habits of emotionally-reactive eating. We begin to enjoy more feelings of 
empowerment, confidence and self-love which further integrate healthy eating 
habits into our lives.

Mindfulness can also be applied to everyday walking as well. We can practice 
"walking meditation" as we observe the subtle movements of the legs and body 
which accompany walking. Our awareness naturally turns inward and our 
concentration deepens as our attention is taken off of stressful thoughts and 
feelings and placed on the relaxing process of moving the body along at a 
comfortable pace. We can take a break from our worries and the demands of the 
day and enjoy a few peaceful moments as we move from car to office, meeting to 
meeting, or from one task to another. All that's required is that we keep the 
attention focused and resist the urge to plan or worry our brief walk away.

Standing, another activity which can fill much of our day, can also become an 
exercise in mindfulness. As in walking meditation, standing meditation simply 
requires us to focus inward on the sensations associated with standing upright. 
If you haven't observed closely what happens when we try to stand still, you're 
in for a surprise. The body is never actually still while standing; its moving 
around with a host of muscles tightening and loosening in the endless dance of 
maintaining balance. Our attention to this dance deepens concentration and 
strengthens the skill of mindful observation. We keep bringing the awareness 
back to the subtle movements of the body whenever the awareness is captured by 
something else arising in our experience. So the next time you find yourself 
caught in a long line, use it as an opportunity to deepen your skill of 
mindfulness. It may transform the way you look at standing in line from a 
bother to an opportunity for a few moments of awareness.

In addition to practicing mindfulness while eating, standing and walking, we 
can bring this habit of being more focused into all aspects of our lives. Our 
social, family and intimate relationships can be enhanced through the practice 
of mindful observation. As we become less trapped by old habits of thought and 
behavior, we allow new possibilities for intimacy to open up. We are better 
able to sit with the emotions that before would have lead to an argument. Our 
exercise, recreation and sports activities are another area where the 
development of mindfulness can bear fruit. Professional sports teams such as 
the Chicago Bulls report significant benefits from this practice.

Whatever you decide will be your focus for deepening the skill of mindfulness, 
you will likely benefit from regular practice. And for practice to become 
regular, it helps if it's enjoyable and easy to do. Allow yourself to play with 
the ideas I offered here. If you allow your imagination a bit of space to run, 
you can come up with many activities in your life which can become 
"meditations." Perhaps simple tasks such as brushing your teeth, shaving, 
putting a key into a lock, moving through a doorway, reaching for the 
telephone, stopping at a traffic light can become "bells of mindfulness." These 
events remind you to turn your focus inward, relax a little bit and connect 
solidly with the breath. Watch the breath flow in and out if only for a moment. 
Many times a day bring yourself back to the present and watch the moments 
unfold. Let the thoughts and judgments about whatÕs happening drop away and 
move your mind into that state of peaceful, focused awareness. In this state of 
self observation, we have control over what the mind is doing with the many 
sensations and thoughts flowing through it. We can move from reactivity to 
responsiveness, from the confinement of our habits into the spaciousness of 
freedom and health.

I wish you success in your journey back to total health!

Concentration Exercises


    I. Counting the IN and OUT breaths can deepen our concentration
    especially when a rather challenging method is used. Such as:

    with the first in breath, say silently to yourself "1," with the first out 
breath, say "2" then in 3, out 4, in 5, then back to out 1, in 2 ... up to 6, 
then up to 7, then up to 8, then up to 9, then up to 10, then back to 1 to 5 
again ... continue until the mind is settled and focused. The process of will 
go like this:

    12345 123456 1234567 12345678 123456789 12345678910 12345 ...

    II. We can also use phrases with the IN and OUT breaths, if we prefer.


    For example, say to yourself on alternating in and out breaths the following

    which is taken from the teachings of Thich Nhat Hanh:

    "In" - "Out"
    "Deep" - "Slow"
    "Calm" - "Ease"
    "Smile" - "Release"
    "Pres" - "ent"
    "Mo" - "ment"
    "Wonder" - "ful"
    "Mo" - "ment"

Some Basic Meditation Instructions

You are sitting or standing comfortably with your eyes closed.

You are breathing comfortably through your nose.

Feel the sensation of your breath as it flows in and out of your nostrils at 
the tip of your nose. Some people feel the sensation more strongly within the 
nostrils, while others feel it more on the upper lip.

To help you locate where you feel the touch sensation of the breath most 
distinctly, inhale deeply and force the air out through your nostrils.Wherever 
you feel the sensation most clearly and precisely is the place to focus your 
attention for the balance of the meditation period. If you can't stay with this 
small target, shift to feeling the rise and fall of your abdomen or chest.

Feel the beginning, the middle, and the end of every in-breath, and the 
beginning, the middle, and the end of every out-breath and be present with the 
pauses in between.

Sometimes the breath will be short; there is no need to make it longer. 
Sometimes the breath will be long; there is no need to make it shorter. 
Sometimes the breath will be erratic; there is no need to make it even or 
smooth.

Just become aware of the breath as it goes in and out of the nostrils at the 
tip of the nose.

Let the breath breathe itself.

Every time your attention moves away from the breath and shifts to another 
physical sensation, sound, smell or thought, gently but firmly bring your 
attention back to the touch sensation of your breath. Do this over and over 
again, resisting the urge to judge or be critical of yourself. Be content to 
start over as many times as you need to. Each time you catch the awareness 
drifting is an opportunity to strengthen the skill of mindful observation, a 
time to strengthen your mental discipline. It is not a "bad" thing, it's just 
what the undisciplined mind does.

Continue practicing in this manner until the end of the time you set aside for 
this period of mindfulness practice.

