Mental Noting Technique

By Gil Fronsdal
[http://www.insightmeditationcenter.org/books-articles/articles/mental-noting/]

Thinking can be a powerful force of distraction, preventing us from
being mindfully present in a useful way. During meditation, a simple
method in which we use thinking to stay present rather than carrying us
away is ‘mental noting’. This is the practice of using a simple “note”
to calmly name – as a whisper in the mind – what we are experiencing.
Though it can take a while to learn, and can be awkward at first, with
practice, mental noting can become second nature.

Noting directs thinking into a simple, rudimentary form, rather than
letting it wander off into distraction. “An idle mind will get in
trouble” is a saying that describes how an insufficiently attentive mind
can all too easily drift off into thought. Mental noting gives the
thinking mind something to do which supports meditation rather than
distracts from it. It can be a useful way to interrupt the incessant
flow of discursive thoughts.

In contrast to most thinking, noting is not discursive. It does not
involve analysis or judgment. Rather, we simply give our current
experience a one-word label. For example, upon hearing a sound we note
‘hearing’ without thinking further about the sound. Other common mental
notes are ‘seeing’, ‘touching’, ‘feeling’, and ‘thinking’.

Some experiences may be given more descriptive labels. For example,
sensations may be noted as ‘warmth’, ‘coolness’, ‘pressure’,
‘tightness’, and so on. Emotions may be named: ‘happiness’, ‘sadness’,
‘excitement’, ‘fear’. Mental activity may be recognized as ‘wanting’,
‘planning’, ‘resisting’, and the like. With mindfulness of breathing
a common note is ‘rising’ as the belly or chest lifts on the inhalation,
and ‘falling’ as we exhale.

Usually, a specific note is repeated until the experience being noted
disappears, is sufficiently acknowledged, or is no longer predominant.

Noting in meditation has many functions. The primary one is keeping the
meditator present – sometimes it is called an ‘anchor’ to the present.
The mind is less likely to wander off if one keeps up a steady stream of
relaxed noting. If the mind does wander, the noting practice can make it
easier to reestablish mindfulness.

Another function of noting is to better acknowledge or recognize what is
occurring: the clearer one’s recognition, the more effective one’s
mindfulness. Naming can strengthen recognition. Sometimes this can be
a kind of truth-telling, when we are reluctant to admit something about
ourselves or about what is happening.

A third function of noting is to help recognize patterns in one’s
experience. A frequently-repeated note reveals a frequently-recurring
experience. For example, persistent worriers may not realize it until
they see how often they note ‘worry’.

And fourth, as described above, mental noting gives the thinking mind
something to do rather than leaving it to its own devices.

A fifth function is disentangling us from being preoccupied or overly
identified with experience. Noting can help us ‘step away’ so that we
might see more clearly. For example, noting ‘wanting’ might pull us out
of the preoccupation with something we want. This may not be immediate,
but by repeatedly noting ‘wanting, wanting,’ one may be able to be aware
of the wanting without being caught by it. As an antidote to drowning in
strong emotion or obsessive thinking, mental noting is sometimes called
a ‘life preserver’.

Noting can also help maintain a non-reactive form of attention. Calmly
and equanimously noting what is happening, we are less likely to get
caught up in emotional reactions. The stories of Mara, the god of
temptation and distraction, visiting the Buddha illustrate this. The
Buddha does not chase Mara away, nor does he give in. He simply looks at
him directly and says, “Mara, I see you.” With this, Mara runs away.
Similarly, noting ‘fear’ can be like saying, “Fear, I see you.” Noting
helps us to see mindfully while remaining free of what we see.

The tone of the inner voice that notes may reveal less-than-equanimous
reactions to what we are trying to be mindful of. The noting may sound
harsh, bored, scared, hesitant, or excited, to name just a few
possibilities. By noticing and adjusting the tone, we may become more
balanced and equanimous.

Each person needs to find his or her own way of noting – it isn’t
a fixed technique. And as circumstances change, how one notes may
change. Sometimes, what is most useful is calmly noting everything one
is being mindful of. Other times, noting may be useful when one is
easily distracted but not when one is settled. Some people only use
noting when being mindful of particular experiences, such as thinking or
feeling emotions. Others limit their noting to naming only what is
distracting. And some people find that it is never helpful to use mental
noting; they prefer a more silent form of knowing.

The noting practice has a number of pitfalls. It can become rote or
mechanical. When one notices this, it’s often useful to pause and relax
before starting again. Another hazard is focusing too much on noting at
the expense of being mindful. One version of this is the ‘check-list
approach’ to mindfulness – one believes it is enough to simply note an
experience. Noting is mostly a slight nudge to encourage mindfulness, so
that attentiveness to the felt experience increases. Another pitfall is
that noting may become an attempt to control or drive one’s experience
instead of simply recognizing it. Or it may be used to create an
artificial distance from experience: naming becomes a substitute for
feeling. Relaxing and allowing the mindfulness to become more receptive
can help with this.

Noting can become a hindrance to meditation if one starts thinking about
what word to use. Sometimes beginners to mental noting are too concerned
with the ‘right’ note. The most obvious label is good enough. If a vague
note like “here” or “this” helps one stay present, it has fulfilled its
primary function. While precision in noting can sometimes sharpen
mindfulness and help with insight, there is no need to analyze one’s way
to greater precision.

Some people find that as the mind becomes more peaceful in meditation
they may need to adjust the relative ‘loudness’ or ‘intensity’ of the
noting to keep it in harmony with the meditative stillness. As the mind
becomes quieter, so should the mental noting. It can become a softer and
softer whisper. At times words are no longer needed – a soft “hmm” may
suffice.

A basic principle for the practice of mental noting is to use it when it
is helpful and to avoid it when it is not. Mindfulness practice aims to
cultivate awareness, insight and liberation. It can be quite satisfying
when noting supports these aims. It can be a reminder that all of one’s
faculties can be used in the service of freedom, including our cognitive
functions such as naming our experience.

