Most lives are lived by default

    The first thing is that everyone has considerable problems.
    Not simply occasional tough spots, but the type of issue that persists for years or decades.
    The kind that becomes a theme in life, that feels like part of your identity.

    The other thing is that they tend to be one of the same few problems:
    lack of human connection,
    lack of personal freedom (due to money or family situations),
    lack of confidence or self-esteem, or
    lack of self-control.

    The day-to-day feel and quality of each of our lives sits on a few major structures:
    where we live,
    what we do for a living,
    what we do with ourselves when we’re not at work, and
    which people we spend most of our time with.

    Making a major change in just one of these areas will necessarily make a major change in the feel and quality of your day-to-day life.

    For most of us, those four major structures were not decided consciously.

    In all likelihood, what you’ve inherited is nowhere near what’s best for you.

    It means if you’re a normal person you can expect that a lot of categories of your life are set up in highly inefficient ways, by default. Certain areas of life could be all wrong for you and you have no idea how good it could be on other side of the fence. It also means that wherever you recognize a persistent source of grief in your life, there is probably a different way to set up your life that could eliminate it or greatly reduce it. It could be a major change, like ending your marriage, or it could just be moving to a different neighborhood in the same city.

    It is typical in human lives to feel like something huge is missing or unsettled.

    It is typical for the major aspects of a human life (career, friends, habits and home) to be decided by happenstance, and not consciously.

    The feeling of something huge being missing is probably often due to a serious mismatch between what you currently have in one of those aspects, and what is best for you in one of those aspects.

    Making conscious changes to the aspects of life you’ve accepted by default can result in dramatic and immediate changes to quality of life.

    Few people do this. Few people make a deliberate quest out of finding their perfect city or neighborhood, of seeking out their truly like-minded. Most of us live seventy or eighty years defending what we’ve been given, because we think it’s who we are.

    At any given time, the prospect of a major change will tend to seem out of the question. This is because you believe you are what you’ve been doing this whole time. From the other side of a major change, the thought of continuing the with way things were will seem absurd.

    But identity is fluid. You’ve been becoming a different person this whole time, and after making a dramatic change, you might find you’re more yourself than you’ve ever been.

Wise People Have Rules For Themselves

    Financially effective people tend to hold themselves to certain rules about money.
    Fit, energetic people tend to have personal rules about health.
    Productive people keep personal rules about work.

    These uncommonly capable people have figured out something that should be obvious: your quality of life improves when you set clear standards for how you live.

    This notion that personal rules constitute “forcing yourself” is just a way of dismissing self-discipline as a possibility, for oneself or others. Brushing your teeth every day doesn’t require any sort of forcing or obsessing, just dental hygiene standards you consider non-negotiable.

You Never Have Time, Only Intentions

The elegant secret to self-discipline

    Self-discipline is time travel
    That’s the elegant secret to discipline: valuing your future self as highly as you value your current self, at least long enough to get your Right Now Self to do the right thing.

    Like any other insight, it’s one thing to nod your head while you think about it and something else to turn it into a real advantage in your life. There are two tricks that I can see to doing it in real-time:

    1) Recognize that right now already is the future. You are currently experiencing the future of all your Past Selves. Their choices have come to fruition.

    2) Recognize the moments when you’re about to sell out your Future Self.