Philosophy of Mind

For a contemporary understanding of the soul/mind and the problem
concerning its connection to the brain/body, consider the rejection of
Descartes' mind/body dualism by Gilbert Ryle's ghost-in-the-machine
argument, the tenuous unassailability of Richard Swinburne's argument
for the soul, and the advances, which have been made in neuroscience and
which are steadily uncovering the truth/falsity of the concept of an
independent soul/mind.

The philosophies mind and of personal identity also contribute to
a contemporary understanding of the mind.  

The contemporary approach does not so much attack the existence of an
independent soul as render the concept less relevant.  

The advances in neuroscience mainly serve to support the mind/brain
identity hypothesis, showing the extent of the correlation between
mental states and physical-brain states.  

The notion of soul has less explanatory power in a western world-view
which prefers the empirical explanations involving observable and
locatable elements of the brain.  

Even so, there remain considerable objections to simple-identity theory.  

Notably, philosophers such as Thomas Nagel and David Chalmers have
argued that the correlation between physical-brain states and mental
states is not strong enough to support identity theory.  

Nagel (1974) argues that no amount of physical data is sufficient to
provide the "what it is like" of first-person experience, and Chalmers
(1996) argues for an "explanatory gap" between functions of the brain
and phenomenal experience.  

On the whole, brain/mind identity theory does poorly in accounting for
mental phenomena of qualia and intentionality.  

While neuroscience has done much to illuminate the functioning of the
brain, much of subjective experience remains mysterious.

Buddhism

Buddhism teaches that all things are in a constant state of flux: all is
changing, and no permanent state exists by itself. 
This applies to human beings as much as to anything else in the cosmos. 
Thus, a human being has no permanent self. 
According to this doctrine of anatta (Pāli; Sanskrit: anātman)
– "no-self" or "no soul" – the words "I" or "me" do not refer to any
fixed thing. 
They are simply convenient terms that allow us to refer to an
ever-changing entity.

The anatta doctrine is not a kind of materialism. 
Buddhism does not deny the existence of "immaterial" entities, and it
(at least traditionally) distinguishes bodily states from mental states. 
Thus, the conventional translation of anatta as "no-soul" can be
confusing. 
If the word "soul" simply refers to an incorporeal component in living
things that can continue after death, then Buddhism does not deny the
existence of the soul. 
Instead, Buddhism denies the existence of a permanent entity that
remains constant behind the changing corporeal and incorporeal
components of a living being. 
Just as the body changes from moment to moment, so thoughts come and go. 
And there is no permanent, underlying mind that experiences these
thoughts, as in Cartesianism; rather, conscious mental states simply
arise and perish with no "thinker" behind them. 
When the body dies, the incorporeal mental processes continue and are
reborn in a new body. 
Because the mental processes are constantly changing, the being that is
reborn is neither entirely different than, nor exactly the same as, the
being that died. 
However, the new being is continuous with the being that died – in the
same way that the "you" of this moment is continuous with the "you" of
a moment before, despite the fact that you are constantly changing.

Buddhist teaching holds that a notion of a permanent, abiding self is
a delusion that is one of the causes of human conflict on the emotional,
social, and political levels. 
They add that an understanding of anatta provides an accurate
description of the human condition, and that this understanding allows
us to pacify our mundane desires.

Various schools of Buddhism have differing ideas about what continues
after death. 
The Yogacara school in Mahayana Buddhism said there are Store
consciousness which continue to exist after death. 
In some schools, particularly Tibetan Buddhism, the view is that there
are three minds: very subtle mind, which does not disintegrate in death;
subtle mind, which disintegrates in death and which is "dreaming mind"
or "unconscious mind"; and gross mind, which does not exist when one is
sleeping. 
Therefore, gross mind less permanent than subtle mind, which does not
exist in death. 
Very subtle mind, however, does continue, and when it "catches on", or
coincides with phenomena, again, a new subtle mind emerges, with its own
personality/assumptions/habits, and that entity experiences karma in the
current continuum.

Plants were said to be non-sentient (無情), but Buddhist monks should
avoid cutting or burning trees, because some sentient beings rely on
them. 
Some Mahayana monks said non-sentient beings such as plants and stones
have buddha-nature. 
Some buddhists said about plants or divisible consciousnesses.

Certain modern Buddhists, particularly in Western countries, reject—or
at least take an agnostic stance toward—the concept of rebirth or
reincarnation, which they view as incompatible with the concept of
anatta. 
Stephen Batchelor discusses this issue in his book, Buddhism Without
Beliefs. 
Others point to research that has been conducted at the University of
Virginia as proof that some people are reborn.

