Fear

WHAT CAUSES TEST ANXIETY?

    Test anxiety is more common than most students realize, and the symptoms are
    the same for almost all students who experience it. The following is
    a typical scenario:

    As you enter the classroom you are aware that you are nervous, your heart is
    beating faster and that your muscles are tense. By the time the test is
    handed out your hands are cold and clammy, your heart is pounding and you
    feel very anxious. You wonder if you have studied enough and believe that
    those around you probably know the material better than you do. You would
    like to leave the room and study for just a few minutes more. You begin to
    feel that you have lost the ability to remember what you studied the night
    before. When reading the test questions, concepts that you know the day
    before no longer make sense. You cannot remember what words mean or you
    cannot remember how to work the problems. You experience a mental block.
    Your mind refuses to work and you feel frustrated, upset, and even though
    you try to relax, nothing seems to work. After the text an amazing thing
    happens: everything that you could not remember suddenly comes back to you.
    You become angry with yourself because you could not think properly during
    the test.

    The physical aspects of test anxiety are biological, consisting of hormonal,
    chemical, and muscular changes in the body. The by-product of this condition
    is interference with the thinking process. The physical symptoms can include
    muscle tension, "butterflies," nausea, shortness of breath, clammy hands,
    rapid heartbeat, and feeling faint. When these symptoms are present, basic
    thinking processes like remembering, analyzing, and problem solving are
    affected. That is the reason that students who experience test anxiety feel
    that their brain is just not working right.

    The biological state of fear or anxiety occurs in response to a perceived
    threat. The purpose of this biological reaction is to keep the body
    vigilant, ready to run or fight if necessary. This is the so-called "fight
    or flight" response that was necessary for humans thousands of years ago.
    Unfortunately, this primitive biological response can cause problems in
    today's society. A person's natural reaction is to run away from, or avoid
    a perceived threat. This is not possible in a college classroom, and being
    required to remain in the presence of a perceived threat (the test) can only
    increase the symptoms. The physical symptoms and anxiety become a vicious
    cycle from which the person cannot escape. If the anxiety becomes too great,
    a person's brain will in effect shut down. This is the body's way of dealing
    with an intolerably high level of stress that cannot be removed.

    In addition to the physical reactions to anxiety, there is a mental
    component at work as well. Anxiety can be created by a person's expectations
    concerning what is likely to happen. These expectations may be expressed in
    words to oneself, mental pictures, or physical symptoms. If a student
    believes, for example, that he or she is going to perform poorly, has not
    studied enough, or will appear foolish, that person will have an emotional
    reaction consistent with that expectation. The mental state of the student
    produces a corresponding emotional reaction.

    Avoidance is a typical behavior pattern of students who experience test
    anxiety. Most students who experience test anxiety also have a problem with
    procrastination. They often avoid studying, and then a day or two before the
    test they start to worry that they have not studied enough. Procrastination
    also leads to last-minute cramming, which can result in the information
    becoming disorganized in the student's brain. This pattern of avoidance
    leads to a vicious cycle: Procrastination leads to last minute cramming,
    which leads to leads to anxiety, which leads to self-doubts, which leads to
    excessive anxiety during a testing situation, which may lead to the
    inability to remember or think logically.

    In addition to feeling unprepared, text anxiety may result from concern
    about how others will view you if you do poorly. Students who experience
    test anxiety tend to be the type of people who put a lot of pressure on
    themselves to perform well. They often have unusually high expectations for
    themselves and, many times, have been very good students in the past. When
    these students begin to experience low grades for the first time—usually in
    college—their self-image of themselves as a smart person begins to erode.
    They then put pressure on themselves to perform better, but oftentimes put
    off studying longer than they should. This may begin a cycle of self-doubts
    and irrational beliefs that can result in high anxiety levels during testing
    situations.

    In conclusion, test anxiety is the result of many interrelated beliefs and
    experiences. Ineffective study methods, and procrastination can lead to
    anxiety and a lowered self-image. Poor performance in a course can lead to
    increased pressure on oneself, especially if the outcome of a test or of
    a course is very important. A single experience of extreme test anxiety can
    leave a student uncertain if it will occur again. The good news for students
    who experience test anxiety is that it may be easily overcome if one is
    willing to follow some guidelines and practice some well-established
    techniques. 

DEALING WITH TEST ANXIETY

    Everyone should feel somewhat anxious before they begin to take a test.
    Anxiety becomes a problem when it begins to interfere with a student's
    ability to think logically or remember facts. Physical symptoms of real test
    anxiety include tense muscles, sweaty palms, a pounding heart, and feeling
    faint or nauseous. Cognitive symptoms include the inability to remember
    simple things, illogical thinking, and mental blocks.

    In dealing with test anxiety one needs to deal with both the physical
    symptoms and the cognitive or mental aspects of test anxiety. Psychologists
    recommend certain techniques that have proven to be extremely successful if
    practiced and used correctly. The key is that these techniques must be
    practiced ahead of time to really work. There is no magic cure for test
    anxiety; overcoming it requires practice and persistence.

    1. Relaxation

    A state of anxiety is incompatible with a state of relaxation, so training in relaxation techniques is by far the most commonly recommended treatment for dealing with any type of anxiety. Systematic relaxation and desensitization have been used successfully by psychologists for many years. These procedures involve only learning two things: Learning to relax all of your muscles, and while you are relaxed imagining the anxiety producing situation. The procedure is outlined below. For a more thorough discussion refer to one of the books listed as references at the end of this handout.

    The relaxation procedure involves systematically tensing and then relaxing
    different groups of muscles in your body:

        a. Begin the procedure by either sitting in a comfortable chair or lying
        down. Move your arms toward the center of your body and bend both arms
        at the elbow. Tighten your hands into fists and simultaneously tense the
        muscles in your upper arms and shoulders. Hold for ten seconds and then
        relax for fifteen to twenty seconds.

        b. Tense your face muscles by wrinkling your forehead and cheek muscles.
        Hold for ten seconds then relax.

        c. Tense the muscles in your chest for fifteen seconds and then relax.
        Repeat this procedure for all the different parts of your body while
        telling yourself that you are becoming more and more relaxed. Pay
        particular attention to the muscles in your neck and back since these
        muscles become tense easily.

        d. After ten or fifteen minutes you will find that your body is
        completely relaxed.

    If you practice this technique over a period of weeks you will find that it becomes easier and easier to achieve a state of complete relaxation. While you are in a state of complete relaxation you then need to begin to visualize yourself in situations that tend to produce anxiety. For example, while you are relaxed, imagine yourself the night before the test. If this does not produce anxiety, then imagine yourself the morning of the test or walking to the room where the test will be given. If any of these images begins to produce anxiety, you will need to practice your relaxation techniques and calm yourself back down. Eventually you should get to the point where you can imagine yourself actually taking the test while remaining completely relaxed.

    This technique has been shown to be better than 90% effective if it is used
    properly, however, they need to be practiced for several weeks to be really
    effective. You cannot wait until you experience an episode of test anxiety
    and then try to relax. It will not work..

    2. Attitude and Mental Preparation

    We tend to create either positive or negative feelings about ourselves
    through the things we think about in a given situation. Anxiety is created
    by a person’s thoughts or expectations about what is likely to happen. The
    remedy for dealing with the cognitive or mental aspects of test anxiety is
    cognitive restructuring. Cognitive restructuring is a process of examining
    the irrational messages one sends to oneself concerning the outcome of tests
    and replacing the irrational negative messages with positive messages.

    What one feels is a by-product of what one thinks. The meaning of an event
    lies not within the event itself but rather in the interpretation of the
    event. Test anxiety is not caused by the test but rather by the meaning that
    the individual attaches to the test. If you mentally tell yourself that you
    are not going to do well or that you have not studied enough, then you will
    have an emotional reaction that is consistant with that message. The
    emotional message will be anxiety because the messages are negative or
    threatening.

    In order to change their thoughts about themselves students must first
    realize that they do in fact have a negative self image. Before a test do
    you feel guilty for not having studied enough? Do you feel that others in
    the class know more than you do? Do you feel that other students seem to get
    better grades without as much effort? Do you feel you are not really smart
    enough to succeed at The University of Alabama? If you find that you have
    subconscious doubts about your ability, or you find yourself thinking
    negative thoughts before a test, then you need to change your thinking about
    yourself. In order to have a positive self-image, you need to find things
    that your can feel positive about. In dealing with test anxiety you have to
    really feel that you have studied all you can and that you are really
    prepared for the test. Initially this may mean that you have to study harder
    than you have ever studied before in order to feel positive about your
    preparation. You don’t want to leave any room for self-doubt to creep in.

    3. Real Studying

    Studying in college is different than studying in high school. Studying in
    college is not just reading the textbook and reading your notes over and
    over. Students who just read over the material may think that they have
    studied, but then find out during a test that they don’t know the material
    as well as they thought they did. If, on a multiple choice test you find
    that two or three of the answers look right, then you do not know the
    material well enough. In reality there is only one right answer and the
    other possible answers are wrong for various reasons. In college you are
    expected to know and understand concepts, theories, and how various things
    are related. You have to know the material very very thoroughly in order to
    make an A on a college test. Often students do not spend the time required
    to really understand the material thoroughly. Real studying involves
    thinking, analyzing, writing things down, organizing the material in
    a meaningful way, and figuring out ahead of time what will be on the test.

    An effective way to deal with test anxiety in a particular course is to
    study for a test so thoroughly that there is no way that you can do poorly.
    This may mean spending two to three times the amount of time and effort
    studying that you normally spend. If you thoroughly understand everything
    that might possibly be on the test, your confidence level will be very high
    and there will not be any room for self-doubt or self-defeating behaviors.

Overcoming test anxiety

    General preparation/building confidence:

    Review your personal situation and skills
    Academic counselors can help you in these areas, or refer to our guides on
    the topic:

    - Developing good study habits and strategies (a link to our directory)
    - Managing time (dealing with procrastination, distractions, laziness)
    - Organizing material to be studied and learned
    - Take a step by step approach to build a strategy and not get overwhelmed
    - Outside pressures : success/failure consequences (grades, graduation), peer pressure, competitiveness, etc.
    - Reviewing your past performance on tests to improve and learn from experience

    Test preparation to reduce anxiety:

    - Approach the exam with confidence:
    Use whatever strategies you can to personalize success: visualization, logic, talking to your self, practice, team work, journaling, etc.
    View the exam as an opportunity to show how much you've studied and to receive a reward for the studying you've done
    - Be prepared!
    Learn your material thoroughly and organize what materials you will need for the test. Use a checklist
    - Choose a comfortable location for taking the test
    with good lighting and minimal distractions
    - Allow yourself plenty of time,
    especially to do things you need to do before the test and still get there a little early
    Avoid thinking you need to cram just before
    - Strive for a relaxed state of concentration
    Avoid speaking with any fellow students who have not prepared, who express negativity, who will distract your preparation
    - A program of exercise
    is said to sharpen the mind
    - Get a good night's sleep 
    the night before the exam
    - Don't go to the exam with an empty stomach
    Fresh fruits and vegetables are often recommended to reduce stress.
    Stressful foods can include processed foods, artificial sweeteners, carbonated soft drinks, chocolate, eggs, fried foods, junk foods, pork, red meat, sugar, white flour products, chips and similar snack foods, foods containing preservatives or heavy spices
    - Take a small snack, or some other nourishment
    to help take your mind off of your anxiety.
    Avoid high sugar content (candy) which may aggravate your condition

    During the test:

    - Read the directions carefully
    - Budget your test taking time
    - Change positions to help you relax
    - If you go blank, skip the question and go on
    - If you're taking an essay test and you go blank on the whole test, pick a question and start writing. It may trigger the answer in your mind
    - Don't panic : when students start handing in their papers. There's no reward for finishing first

    Use relaxation techniques

    If you find yourself tensing and getting anxious during the test:

    - Relax; you are in control. 
    Take slow, deep breaths

    - Don't think about the fear
    Pause: think about the next step and keep on task, step by step

    - Use positive reinforcement for yourself: 
    Acknowledge that you have done, and are doing, your best

    - Expect some anxiety
    It's a reminder that you want to do your best and can provide energy
    Just keep it manageable

    - Realize that anxiety can be a "habit" 
    and that it takes practice to use it as a tool to succeed

    - After the test, review how you did

        - List what worked, and hold onto these strategies
        It does not matter how small the items are: they are building blocks to success
        - List what did not work for improvement
        - Celebrate that you are on the road to overcoming this obstacle
    
    Check out local centers and resources in your school for assistance!

    If you are aware that you have a problem with test anxiety,
    be sure your teacher or instructor knows before any testing begins 
    (and not the hour before!). 
    There may be other options to evaluate your knowledge or performance within the subject matter.
