* the secret weapon

1. Action Items: Things I need to do that originated as an email. I can’t remove the email
from the Inbox because the to-do still needs to be done.

2. Waiting Items: Emails I have responded to and am now waiting for a reply. I leave the
email in the Inbox because the person hasn’t replied.

3. Read/Review Items: Emails that I want to read when I get the time (right). Once I read it,
I’ll then remove it from the Inbox.

4. Sticky Items: Emails that I can’t explain why I don’t save them to an archive folder, or
delete them. I may just want to be reminded to pursue the concept, or I’m just afraid I’ll
forget the idea if I archive/delete it.

** A better way

- Keep everything in one system (versus one way for one kind of to-dos and another method
for other types of to-dos).

- Allow you to group items in different ways, so that you’re not staring at all 80 to-dos that
you’ve written down. Instead, you can look only at “Downtown” to-dos, or “My daughter” to
dos. You can sort by priority, where, who and/or what.

- Allow you to remove emails out of the Inbox and into your to-do system, so that you can
experience Inbox Zero. These emails can be sorted as either:
1. an “action” item
2. a “waiting for” item
3. a “to be reviewed/read” item, or
4. a “deferred until later” item

- Be where you are, up to date, when you need it.

- Allow you to approach what to do next from different points of view, “wearing different hats”
and organize and view those items accordingly.

- have a way to capture ideas and to-do
items when you think of them, getting ALL
of them out of your head.

- keep you in control and not overwhelmed
even if you have a TON of things to do.

** Getting Things Done:

- Identify all the stuff in your life that isn’t in the right place (close all open loops)
- Get rid of the stuff that isn’t yours or you don’t need right now
- Create a right place that you trust and that supports your working style and values
- Put your stuff in the right place, consistently
- Do your stuff in a way that honors your time, your energy, and the context of any given moment
- Review weekly

Collect, Process, Execute, Review.
The GTD mantra. Four words: Collect, Process, Execute, Review.

1. Collect

Through each day (especially when you wake up on Monday), invariably your email
Inbox will become full of new items, and your head will be buzzing with new
things you need to do. So daily, especially starting out each morning, collect
all new to-dos and put them into Evernote. Some of the ways of doing this
include:

1. Process the to-dos out of your email client Inbox
2. Gather all meeting notes, audio notes (EN can has an audio record feature for notes) and
scraps of paper that you’ve accrued and extract the to-dos from them
3. Capture ideas/pending actions as they happen.

2. Process

After you have collected the new items into Evernote, then process them by
adding contexts to them. Remember, a rule of TSW is that every pending action
receives at least a .When context. Many of us here at TrueToniqs keep our to-
dos/notes sorted by Created date during the week, so all of the new ones are at
the top. If a to-do wasn’t tagged when it was added you can quickly see that it
needs a tag (because all the new to-dos are there at the top of the list), and a
context can quickly be added. After a few days of daily processing, you will
find you can get through this second Process step pretty quickly.

3. Execute!

Now that all pending action items are in the system, and properly grouped, let’s
start getting things done. Time to execute.

When approaching our next thing to do, we typically are in some frame of mind.
We might be in “Work” mode, and therefore want to focus on just those items, or
in “Home” mode, or “Dad” mode, or “With Dave” mode, etc. One of the most
powerful features of Evernote is the ability to combine two contexts to focus on
in a specific set of tasks. For example, if you arrive at work, you might start
with @work and 1-Now to start executing those work items that are of the highest
priority.

Typically, we might select the 1-Now tag, and if there are too many of those,
also select a .Where, .What, or .Who context also. Once we review and/or execute
those, we will unselect the second context, and move to another secondary
context to combine with 1-Now. This feature is very powerful, as you can filter
down to a reasonable chunk of items to focus upon.

As you complete an item, get it out of the Action Pending category. You can do
this by dragging it into the Completed notebook. This takes the note out of
Action Pending, and puts it with other completed items. All the tags associated
with the note stay with it, so you can still search the Completed notebook if
you select it instead of Actions Pending.

One thing to notice is that the quantity next to each tag; for example, 1-Now
(388) includes all notes with that tag, both completed and pending. To see how
many items you actually have pending for a given context, click on that tag, and
you can see the total notes on the “filter bar” at the top. Don’t see the filter
bar? There is a small down arrow to the right of the search bar that expands it.

4. Review

Reviewing your trusted system is at the heart of the GTD mindset, and imperative
if you are to keep TSW in tune with your overall execution goals. During review,
every pending action is read and considered, even if only momentarily, with the
ultimate question being: “Is it time to move this deferred item up in priority
of .When to do it?”

As you complete your 1-Now items and archive them, the next logical step is to
put more into 1-Now. During the day, and nightly, decide which of the 2-Next
items should graduate to the 1-Now pile.

When at work, it will be those @work/2-Next items that are moved, and when you
get home, it might be those 2-Next/@home items. This constant review makes sure
that there are plenty of items in the 1-Now context from which to choose.
Equally important, it will prevent any to-dos from getting neglected, collecting
dust, and falling way off your radar of what’s important.

You may ask, What is the !Daily tag for? This is reserved for those items you are working to
habituate into your life. It really could be called “Make this a habit!” 
Anyone who’s studied how
to create a new habit knows that it takes about 21 days of constant repetition before it’s
ingrained. So !Daily is for the little things we remind ourselves of and do that matter the most

On Sunday morning get up early, prepare a cup of tea or coffee (or Brain Toniq) and commit to
reviewing, one by one, every item that is Action Pending. From 1-Now to 5-Someday. Because
every note has a .When context, you can be sure that if you view each .When context, you will
touch every item. Nothing missed.

This is the crux of your system, as it is a good time for reflection, and to keep your mind on why
you are signing up for processing all of these things! Think about which ones can be moved
ever closer to the 1-Now context (because that is the ultimate point, right?)

[Tip from Jeff: “While I mainly keep my notes sorted by Created Date during the week
so that I see the newest notes first, on these special Review times, I sort notes by Tag.
Then I can begin my review with all 1-Now items, and they sort by like kind secondary
context. This puts all work items that are 1-Now together, so I can review them grouped
together, move on to 1-Now @home items etc. until I finish my 1-Now review. I then go
to the next .When context, which is 2-Next, and do the same until I have reviewed all
notes with a time context.”]

During Review time, mull on anything that you have in your head that needs to be added. As
you read each item, think about what other contexts might be good to add for referral later.
Review how well you actually executed all things in 1-Now. Maybe you are moving too many too
fast?

Give a bit of thought as to WHY you are doing all this, and how it applies to your overall goals.
While during the week your focus tends to be execution, this is a time for reflection. There is an
underlying plan for nirvana, happiness, and world domination. Let it simmer up to
consciousness during Review time.


** Tags, aka Contexts

tags work as “contexts” that we can assign to each of our pending actions, or
to-dos. For example, there are some WHERE contexts, such as “downtown” or “work”
or “home” which we think will be the best place accomplish that to-do. Some
other valuable contexts or tags might be time based—a WHEN category—such as
“Now” or “Soon” or even a “Later” or “This Week.” Another valuable set of
contexts might be based on WHO you are in front of.

** Setup

*** Setting up Notebooks

Evernote allows you to separate your items (what Evernote calls “notes” and what
TSW calls “to-dos” or “Action Items”) into named containers called Notebooks.

Cabinet: A file cabinet that holds items for reference that aren’t to-do. This
could be for items like price sheets, car registration, blood tests or other
medical records, insurance cards, scans, etc. You don’t necessarily need to do
anything, but want them handy.

Action Pending: The Action Pending notebook is where all items that have pending
action reside. Everything from your largest projects to ‘get milk’ goes in here.

Completed: The Completed notebook is where we put all that is done. That leaves
the Action Pending notebook small and nimble, with only those outstanding items
that have a pending action.

*** Create your initial Tags

The next step is to set up your contexts (tags)

What
.When
.Where
.Who
.Active Projects
.Inactive Projects
!Daily
1-Now
2-Next
3-Soon
4-Later
5-Someday
6-Waiting
@home
@work
@town
Read/Review

Last, add the first names of any family member or coworkers who you have to-dos
with (remember you can always add more or delete these later).

[Jeff Tip: “The who/what/where/when tags are what we call Header Tags, and we
denote these by placing a .(period) in front of each one. This not only forces
them to the top of the Tag list, but reminds us to not use them as an assigned
context; as you’ll see, they’re just folder names for the related tags/contexts
that we can nest below them.”]

Under the .What tag, drag:
.Active Projects
.Inactive Projects
Read/Review

Just click, hold and drag each tag you created onto the Header Tag to which it
belongs. When you let it go, it will appear “nested” or “in the folder of” the
Header Tag. For .When, drag in:

!Daily
1-Now
2-Next
3-Soon
4-Later
5-Someday
6-Waiting

For .Who drag in:
[Family member]
[Co Worker]
For .Where, drag in:
@home
@work
@town

If you want to practice adding tags individually, you can now add, for instance,
any major projects that you are currently working on. Add them via the lower
left + sign, New Tag. Then drag these over your .Active Projects, so they nest
under it.

*** Why Nesting

By nesting the tags under headers, you accomplish several things. First, you
group like contexts together. Most times when you have something to do, there is
a sense of .What it is for, .When it needs to get done, .Who should know about
it or will actually do it, and .Where you might need to be to do it.

Next, nesting allows you to expand and collapse the contexts under each header,
as if they were file folders. Thi is handy when you have several tags under say
the .Who context, and want to conserve space when you are on your laptop, or if
you don’t use those very often, you can keep them “hidden”, but accessible.
Typically you may compress the .What section, or at least the .Active Projects
and .Inactive Project sub sections, for example. It should look something like
this in the image to the right. The next step is to start adding some to-dos!

** Your First TSW to-do

populate the todo list

** Organize your to-dos

Your next step is to go to Evernote and start to assign contexts to each and
every to-do that you’ve created from your emails. You now have to “process” your
new email Inbox of items, all of which are so far derived from emails.

Every to-do should have at the least a .When context/tag, as we always have some
notion of what comes first, second etc. The beauty—and power—here is that it can
belong to MULTIPLE contexts. You can drag an item onto 2-Next, and then drag it
onto the next context/ tag, say @Work.

*** Other Contexts

After you attach a .When you want to get this done, you can next add a .What
project or role to which it belongs, a .Who it is for, and sometimes a .Where
you need to be to do it.

Do this for each and every to-do in your list. Every single to-do (formerly an
email that had something that needed an action) needs to have at least the .When
context assigned to it.

A note on the .When contexts: 1-Now is reserved for items that are to be
executed now—the DO THESE NOW pile. All others are in a deferred context of
2-Next or further out. Time contexts are our way of denoting relative importance
and priority; in other words, what gets done first, second, etc., and the 2-Next
group of notes are those teed up to go to 1-Now next

What about those “Sticky emails” that don’t really have an action, but you don’t
want to “lose them”? Anything you want available to you at all times just for
reference can be dragged into your digital file cabinet, conveniently called
Cabinet. Key word search works for all notes, so by typing a word from the note
for which you are looking, you can easily find an item in your cabinet quickly.

Let’s review: we’ve gotten every single email out of our email Inbox, and
organized them into what, when, where, who. Check.

