# Waking up


The wrong way is to try using your conscious willpower to get yourself out of bed each morning.
That might work every once in a while, but let’s face it — you’re not always going to be thinking straight the moment your alarm goes off.
You may experience what I call the fog of brain.
The decisions you make in that state won’t necessarily be the ones you’d make when you’re fully conscious and alert.
You can’t really trust yourself… nor should you.

If you use this approach, you’re likely to fall into a trap.
You decide to get up at a certain time in advance, but then you undo that decision when the alarm goes off.
At 10pm you decide it would be a good idea to get up at 5am.
But at 5am you decide it would be a better idea to get up at 8am.
But let’s face it — you know the 10pm decision is the one you really want implemented… if only you could get your 5am self to go along with it.

Now some people, upon encountering this conundrum, will conclude that they simply need more discipline.
And that’s actually somewhat true, but not in the way you’d expect.
If you want to get up at 5am, you don’t need more discipline at 5am.
You don’t need better self-talk.
You don’t need two or three alarm clocks scattered around the room.
And you don’t need an advanced alarm that includes technology from NASA’s astronaut toilets.

You actually need more discipline when you’re fully awake and conscious:  the discipline to know that you can’t trust yourself to make intelligent, conscious decisions the moment you first wake up.
You need the discipline to accept that you’re not going to make the right call at 5am.
Your 5am coach is no good, so you need to fire him.

What’s the real solution then?
The solution is to delegate the problem.
Turn the whole thing over to your subconscious mind.
Cut your conscious mind out of the loop.

Now how do you do this?
The same way you learned any other repeatable skill.
You practice until it becomes rote.
Eventually your subconscious will take over and run the script on autopilot.

This is going to sound really stupid, but it works.
Practice getting up as soon as your alarm goes off.
That’s right — practice.
But don’t do it in the morning.
Do it during the day when you’re wide awake.

Go to your bedroom, and set the room conditions to match your desired wake-up time as best you can.
Darken the room, or practice in the evening just after sunset so it’s already dark.
If you sleep in pajamas, put on your pajamas.
If you brush your teeth before bed, then brush your teeth.
If you take off your glasses or contacts when you sleep, then take those off too.

Set your alarm for a few minutes ahead.
Lie down in bed just like you would if you were sleeping, and close your eyes.
Get into your favorite sleep position.
Imagine it’s early in the morning… a few minutes before your desired wake-up time.
Pretend you’re actually asleep.
Visualize a dream location, or just zone out as best you can.

Now when your alarm goes off, turn it off as fast as you can.
Then take a deep breath to fully inflate your lungs, and stretch your limbs out in all directions for a couple seconds… like you’re stretching during a yawn.
Then sit up, plant your feet on the floor, and stand up.
Smile a big smile.
Then proceed to do the very next action you’d like to do upon waking.
For me it’s getting dressed.

Now shake yourself off, restore the pre-waking conditions, return to bed, reset your alarm, and repeat.
Do this over and over and over until it becomes so automatic that you run through the whole ritual without thinking about it.
If you have to subvocalize any of the steps (i.e. if you hear a mental voice coaching you on what to do), you’re not there yet.

Feel free to devote several sessions over a period of days to this practice.
Think of it like doing sets and reps at the gym.
Do one or two sets per day at different times… and perhaps 3-10 reps each time.

Yes, it will take some time to do this, but that time is nothing compared to how much time you’ll save in the long run.
A few hours of practice today can save you hundreds of hours each year.

With enough practice — I can’t give you an accurate estimate of how long it will take because it will be different for everyone – you’ll condition a new physiological response to the sound of your alarm.
When your alarm goes off, you’ll get up automatically without even thinking about it.
The more you run the pattern, the stronger it will become.
Eventually it will be uncomfortable not to get up when your alarm goes off.
It will feel like putting on your pants with the opposite leg first.

You can also practice mentally if you’re good at visualizing.
Mental practice is faster, but I think it’s best to run through the whole thing physically.
There are subtle details you might miss if you only rehearse mentally, and you want your subconscious to capture the real flavor of the experience.
So if you do use mental practice, at least do it physically the first few times.

The more you practice your wake-up ritual, the deeper you’ll ingrain this habit into your subconscious.
Alarm goes off -> get up immediately.
Alarm goes off -> get up immediately.
Alarm goes off -> get up immediately.

Once this becomes a daily habit, you won’t have to do anymore daytime practice.
This type of habit is self-reinforcing.
You only have to go through the conditioning period once.
Then you’re basically set for life until you decide to change it.
Even if you fall out of the habit for some reason (like an extended vacation in a different time zone), you’ll be able to return to it more easily.
Think of it like muscle memory.
Once you’ve grooved in the pattern, it will still be there even if you let some weeds grow over it.

Any behavior pattern you experience when your alarm goes off will become self-reinforcing if you repeat it enough times.
Chances are that you already have a well-established wake-up ritual, but it may not be the one you want.
The more you repeat your existing pattern, the more you condition it into your subconscious.
Every time you fail to get up when your alarm goes off, that becomes ever more your default physiological response.
If you want to change that behavior, you’ll need to undertake a conscious reconditioning program such as the one I described above.

Beating yourself up about your bad wake-up habits will not work — in fact, you’ll just condition these mental beatings as part of the very routine you’re trying to change.
Not only will you not get up when your alarm goes off, but you’ll also automatically beat yourself up about it.
How lame is that?
Do you really want to keep running that dumb pattern for the rest of your life?
That’s exactly what will happen if you don’t condition a more empowering pattern.
For good or ill, your habits will make or break you.

Once you establish your desired wake-up ritual, I recommend you stick with it every single day – 7 days a week, 365 days a year.
And for the first 30 days, set your alarm for the same time every day.
Once the habit is established, then you can vary your wake-up times or occasionally go without the alarm if you want to sleep in, but until then it’s best to keep the pattern very tight.
That way it will become your default behavior, and you’ll be able to stray from time to time without serious risk of deconditioning it.

I’m confident that once you establish this habit, you’ll absolutely love it.
I consider this to be one my most productive habits.
It saves me hundreds of hours a year, and it keeps paying dividends day after day.
I also found this habit extremely valuable during my polyphasic sleep experiment.

Think about it — if you oversleep just 30 minutes a day, that’s 180+ hours a year.
And if you’re at 60 minutes a day, that’s 365 hours a year, the equivalent of nine 40-hour weeks.
That’s a lot of time!
Now I don’t know about you, but I can think of more creative things to do with that time than lying in bed longer than I need to.

I encourage you to give this method a try.
I know it seems silly to practice getting out of bed, but hey, what if it works?
What if you knew with total certainty that if you set your alarm for a certain time, you would absolutely get up at that time no matter what?
There’s no reason you can’t create that for yourself over the next few days.
Practice makes permanent.



Waking up groggy

    During my teen years and well into my 20s, I would usually wake up feeling very groggy in the morning.  Even after sleeping 8-9 hours, I could have kept right on sleeping.  A couple of my siblings were the same way.  To get them up before noon required dragging their covers off.  We only got up early when we had to, never by choice.

    I wasn’t much good during those morning hours.  I’d go through the motions of getting dressed and having breakfast, but I didn’t feel my brain was fully online yet.  Since I was raised Catholic (I know — I’m mostly recovered now), every Sunday morning my parents would take us to church at 7:30am.  Most of the time I sat through the mass in a half-conscious zombie state.  I think they made the pews hard and uncomfortable to keep people from napping… but I’ll leave the rest of the Catholic commentary to George Carlin.

    From grog monster to early riser

    Fast forward to the present, and I’m a habitual early riser.  Since I work from home and set my own hours, I can sleep in as late as I want.  But I get up at 5am by choice.  I like being up before dawn and getting an early start each day.  It’s very easy to maintain.  It feels like the path of least resistance.

    If you’re so groggy you can’t get up before drifting back to sleep, you don’t need a new alarm clock.  You don’t need to move your alarm clock across the room.  And you don’t need a spring-loaded bed.  What you really need is to address the factors that are making you wake up groggy in the first place.

    I’m going to share what worked best for me in gradually converting from an AM zombie to an alert early riser.  These tips will expand on and add to what’s already been covered in How to Become an Early Riser, How to Become an Early Riser – Part II, and How to Get Up Right Away When Your Alarm Goes Off.  Those articles focused on building an effective strategy for getting up early.  This article is about what you can do to ensure that when you do get up early, you feel alert and awake instead of tired and groggy, so you can develop early rising as a long-term habit.

Experiment.

    This is the most important principle of all.  If your current method of getting up each morning doesn’t feel right to you, then admit that it sucks, and try something else.  If it’s not working, stop doing it.  And for goodness sakes, don’t complain about it, since that can’t possibly help.

    If you wake up groggy, it doesn’t mean you’re broken.  It just means you’re making some physiological mistakes, and those mistakes can be corrected.  The only way to get there, however, is to try something else.  And if you’ve never been able to wake up feeling totally alert, then most likely you’ll need to try something you’ve never done before.  If you aren’t willing to do that, you’re doomed.

    As you experiment, seek improvement, not perfection.  All you really need to is to find some minor tweak that works a little bit better, and repeat.  Some of the changes I’ll suggest may sound radical if you think about implementing them all at once, but those radical steps represent a lot of little changes accumulated over a long period of time.

    Be patient in developing this skill.  There’s no rush.  If you can become an early riser in your teen years, that’s incredible.  It wasn’t until my 30s that I felt I’d really mastered it.

Decide you’ll make it.

    Like most people, I oscillated between that enthusiastic feeling that I’ll be able to find a way to do this vs. that sinking feeling of having to admit that maybe I’m just not biologically suited for it.  I kept making one push after another, but I could only get up early for a few days in a row at most before the fatigue would overwhelm me, and I’d crash.

    If you’re fighting overwhelming fatigue or if getting up early seems virtually impossible, let me suggest that your approach may be wrong.  Yes, there will be an adaptation period if you’re shifting your wake-up time, but it shouldn’t require an inhuman amount of discipline.  It should only be mildly challenging.  If the challenge level is too high, you’re tackling the problem from the wrong angle.  Motivation is important, but technique plays a major role too.

    Here’s what success in early rising looks like.  You wake up early, and you feel wide awake and very contented.  There will be some variation from day to day, but overall you’re alert and functional.  As you get up, it feels like your conscious mind is going through a rapid boot-up process.  You may remember having an interesting dream.  You’ll also begin to think about the coming day.  This all happens within a matter of seconds.

    When you decide to make it, be sure to hold the right goal in mind.  Forcing yourself out of bed while feeling like a zombie isn’t the goal to shoot for.  I had a real breakthrough when I decided I wanted to get up early AND feel totally alert when I got up.  That may sound like a very basic distinction, but being able to hold the correct intention in mind was a key step.  If you have mixed feelings about getting up early, then sort through those feelings until you can paint a picture that feels right to you.  Make success a matter of when, not if.

Fix your diet.

    Diet and sleep are inextricably intertwined.  If you think you can master your sleeping habits without improving your diet, you’re deluding yourself.  Seriously.

    Unfortunately most people — Americans especially — consume a truly hideous diet these days, filled with hormone-laden animal products, artificial ingredients, sugar, caffeine, salt, white flour, and heavily processed junk.  An unhealthy diet will tax your endocrine system (which is responsible for hormone production), and that is going to prevent you from enjoying restful sleep.

    What works well for me is a whole foods vegan diet, heavy on the raw fruits and veggies.  When I went vegetarian in 1993, I was able to feel well rested with less sleep, and I woke up feeling more alert.  Then when I went fully vegan in 1997, there was another improvement.  As I explained in Why Vegan, the energy difference is the primary reason I converted to such a diet.

    Just as you may wake up with a hangover if you consume too much alcohol, you’ll suffer from other types of hangovers if you consume mood-altering substances.  Two of the worst are sugar and caffeine.  If your diet is high in caffeine and/or sugar (especially in the forum of corn syrup or high fructose corn syrup), do yourself a favor and conduct a 30-day trial without them.  I notice that if I have just one cup of coffee in the morning, I won’t sleep as deeply the following night, it will take me much longer to fall asleep, and I’ll wake up feeling a lot more groggy — almost 24 hours later.  (For specific ideas on quitting coffee, see How to Give Up Coffee.)

    If you’ve been messing with your physiology by consuming excessive sugar, caffeine, processed foods, etc, I highly recommend you fix your diet first before attempting to master your sleep habits.  Otherwise you’re only going to frustrate yourself.  Two and a half years of feedback from readers attempting to become early risers has taught me it’s almost a rule that waking up groggy and eating a crappy diet go hand in hand.  Keep in mind that in the USA, the average diet is an extremely crappy diet.  I think that’s why people who wake up before dawn feeling totally alert tend to be considered overachievers, freaks, or genetically gifted.  From the early risers’ perspective, it seems like everyone else is drugging themselves into a stupor.

    At the opposite extreme, people who are fasting often report needing much less sleep.  I had a friend who was really into juice fasting, and he told me he’d only sleep about 4 hours a night during a fast.

    I encourage you to experiment to find the best diet for you, which may or may not be similar to mine.  Find out which manner of eating helps you feel best in the morning.  I could overload you with all sorts of dietary statistics, but I don’t suggest you model your diet on statistics.  Let personal experimentation be your guide, and notice how you feel when you eat different types of food for an extended period – and especially how you feel when you wake up each morning.  If you awaken feeling totally groggy, try eating different foods for a while.

Eat lightly at night.

    This could be considered a corollary to the above, but it’s important enough that it deserves special attention.  If your body must digest a heavy meal while you’re sleeping, your sleep will not be as restorative, and you’re far more likely to wake up groggy the next morning.

    Social conditioning may have taught you that a big dinner is the way to go, but for the real truth, you must consult your body.  Even if you’re not a strict vegetarian, I highly recommend you try steering clear of animal foods for your evening meal.  They take the longest amount of time to digest and are very likely to make you groggy the next morning.

    Fresh fruit is perhaps the ideal food to eat for your last meal, especially low-sugar fruits like tomatoes, avocados, peppers, and cantaloupe.  Personally I’m not a big fan of having nothing but fruit for dinner, but when I do, I usually don’t need as much sleep, and I almost always wake up feeling more alert.  So regardless of what my mind has to say about it, my body clearly likes it.

    A very close second choice for an evening meal would be fresh veggies, especially a big salad.  After that would be lightly cooked veggies.  The less processed your evening meal, the less energy it will take to digest, and the less it will disrupt your physiology.  If you eat crap before bed, you can expect to feel like crap in the morning.

    You’ve probably heard the advice that you should stop eating at least 2-3 hours before bedtime.  If you normally eat a heavy dinner, that advice will help a little.  But I can eat a large fruit or veggie salad right before bed, and it doesn’t seem to disrupt my sleep.  I think it’s because our bodies are so well suited for fruit and veggie consumption.  Such meals require very little energy to digest compared to other foods, so they don’t strain our internal resources and disrupt our sleep.

    This is an area where I encourage you to experiment a lot.  Try eating a very light dinner tonight, and see how you feel the next morning.

Exercise daily.

    Even before I went vegetarian, I noticed a major improvement in my sleep patterns when I started exercising aerobically on a daily basis.  I suppose the current term for aerobic exercise is “cardio,” but I don’t like that word because it invariably triggers my trendy-words-that-make-me-vomit filter.  It’s right up there with Web 2.0.

    You’ve probably heard this advice before, but there’s a difference between hearing advice and applying it.  So go apply it, and get thine ass to the gym.  At the very least, run around the block for 25 minutes each morning.  If you don’t do it, you don’t know it.

    When I’m exercising aerobically every day for at least 20 minutes, I can shave a good hour off my sleep each night, which more than compensates for the exercise time.  I wake up feeling more alert and energetic too.  But the best part is that I enjoy better concentration and alertness all day long.  It works way better than caffeine… and without the crash.

    I’ve also done weight training for months at a time, both with and without aerobic exercise.  Despite the other benefits of weight training, by itself it doesn’t seem to benefit my sleep patterns and morning alertness.  It doesn’t seem to hurt my sleep either though, even when I’ve trained vigorously with major soreness.

    Be aware that marketers frequently attempt to manipulate exercise trends to boost product sales.  You won’t normally see inexpensive exercises like running getting much promotional attention (unless it’s to sell you an iPod to listen to while running).  Try not to be swayed by the marketing fluff, and go with what works for you, whether it’s trendy or not.  If you feel compelled to spend money on your health, buy the best organic produce you can find, and keep your daily exercise cheap and simple.

    Get up at the same time every day, including weekends.

    This was mentioned in the original early riser article.  Getting up at the same time every day is pretty important when you’re first establishing the habit of early rising.  In the beginning it’s too easy to fall off track, so I suggest that you get up at the same time every single day for at least 30 days.  If you feel compelled to sleep in on weekends, you’re probably doing something wrong.  Again, it should feel good to get up early.  If you’re doing it because you want to, and it’s working, it will feel normal and natural to do it every day.  If you think you need a cheat day, something is definitely off.  Why would you cheat yourself out of something you like doing?

    After you’ve been waking up energized for at least a month to establish the habit, doing it every single day isn’t critical.  If I want to stay out late one night, I might sleep in until 6:30 or 7:00 the next morning.  But the next day I’m back on schedule with no trouble.  My normal bedtime is between 10 and 11pm, but I can stay up well past 1am without much difficulty if something stimulating is happening.

    Last week Erin and I were in New York City, and my sleep schedule was all over the place during the trip.  Some mornings we got up early, while other days we slept in until 8am.  But upon returning to Vegas, I had no trouble getting back on my original sleep schedule.  New York City (Eastern Time) is 3 hours ahead of Las Vegas (Pacific Time), so I was normally waking up earlier than usual on this trip.  I’m not sure how easy it would be to re-adapt if we went to Hawaii instead.  I’ll have to test that soon.

    I recommend using an alarm clock unless you can set very reliable mental alarms.  I still use an alarm clock every morning, but now it’s more of a conditioning maintenance device rather than a wake-up device.  I probably don’t need an alarm to keep getting up early at a relatively consistent time, but since I conditioned myself to get up when the alarm goes off, it’s just part of my routine.  I haven’t put much effort into building skill with mental alarms, largely because the alarm clock solution already works fine.

Go to bed only when you’re sleepy.

    This was also mentioned in the first early riser article.  Instead of going to bed at a fixed time each night, stay up until you’re sleepy.

    If you’re lying awake at night for 30 minutes or more trying to fall asleep, I’d say you’ve gone to bed too early.  Get up and read for a while.  When you start to nod off while reading, it’s time for bed.

    Most nights I can fall asleep within a few minutes after lying down.  If I’m not sleepy, I stay up until I am.  Sometimes I’m ready to crash at 9:30.  Other times I’ll stay up until 11:30.  But most of the time the onset of sleepiness occurs pretty close to the same time, which for me is between 10 and 10:30.  I perceive it as a gentle nudging that tells me if I lie down, I’ll be able to fall asleep fast.

    In the first early riser article, I explained that if you start going to bed when you’re sleepy and get up at a fixed time each morning, your body will eventually adapt.  For clarity I should add the caveat, “… if you aren’t excessively screwing with your biochemistry.”  Much of the feedback I’ve received tells me that most people can adapt to becoming early risers within about 3-5 days.  That’s how long it takes them to hone in on a fairly consistent bedtime that gives them enough sleep to feel well-rested the next morning and not feel sleep deprived during the day.  However, the ones who eat a really poor diet or who drink alcohol every night rarely make it past the third day; they almost invariably give up.

Develop a pleasant morning routine.

    If you don’t like the way you spend your mornings, you may suffer the problem of waking up without getting up.  A good morning routine can help remedy that.  It’s important to have something to look forward to that makes you eager to get out of bed.

    My usual morning routine is pretty basic, but it works for me.  After I get up, I shave and put on my gym clothes.  Then I head for the gym, do my workout, return home, shower, and dress.  After that I’ll usually talk to Erin and the kids for a bit and have breakfast.

    I like going to the gym, so it serves as a good reason to get out of bed.  I know that exercising will leave me feeling even more energized.

    This is a rich place for experimentation.  Some people like getting up and working on a home-based business for an hour or two.  Others like to meditate first thing in the morning.  In this particular area, the rule is to do whatever works for you.  If playing your favorite video game for an hour helps motivate you to get out of bed early, try it for a few days and see how it goes.

    If your morning routine ever becomes boring, change it.  Any effective routine may eventually stop working for you.  Do whatever is necessary to keep it interesting.

    What about an evening routine?  It’s common advice that having a relaxing routine for winding down before bed will improve your sleep.  For me it doesn’t seem to make much difference.  I can enjoy a lot of variety and activity in my evenings, and I still sleep just fine and wake up alert.  A stable evening routine can help compensate for a stressful lifestyle, but otherwise I don’t think it’s that important.  Feel free to experiment with an evening shutdown process to see what works best for you.

Make it so!




It is well to be up before daybreak, for such habits contribute to health, wealth, and wisdom.
- Aristotle

Are morning people born or made? In my case it was definitely made. In my early 20s, I rarely went to bed before midnight, and I’d almost always sleep in late. I usually didn’t start hitting my stride each day until late afternoon.

But after a while I couldn’t ignore the high correlation between success and rising early, even in my own life. On those rare occasions where I did get up early, I noticed that my productivity was almost always higher, not just in the morning but all throughout the day. And I also noticed a significant feeling of well-being. So being the proactive goal-achiever I was, I set out to become a habitual early riser. I promptly set my alarm clock for 5AM…

… and the next morning, I got up just before noon.

Hmmm…

I tried again many more times, each time not getting very far with it. I figured I must have been born without the early riser gene. Whenever my alarm went off, my first thought was always to stop that blasted noise and go back to sleep. I tabled this habit for a number of years, but eventually I came across some sleep research that showed me that I was going about this problem the wrong way. Once I applied those ideas, I was able to become an early riser consistently.

It’s hard to become an early riser using the wrong strategy. But with the right strategy, it’s relatively easy.

The most common wrong strategy is this: You assume that if you’re going to get up earlier, you’d better go to bed earlier. So you figure out how much sleep you’re getting now, and then just shift everything back a few hours. If you now sleep from midnight to 8am, you figure you’ll go to bed at 10pm and get up at 6am instead. Sounds very reasonable, but it will usually fail.

It seems there are two main schools of thought about sleep patterns. One is that you should go to bed and get up at the same times every day. It’s like having an alarm clock on both ends — you try to sleep the same hours each night. This seems practical for living in modern society. We need predictability in our schedules. And we need to ensure adequate rest.

The second school says you should listen to your body’s needs and go to bed when you’re tired and get up when you naturally wake up. This approach is rooted in biology. Our bodies should know how much rest we need, so we should listen to them.

Through trial and error, I found out for myself that both of these schools are suboptimal sleep patterns. Both of them are wrong if you care about productivity. Here’s why:

If you sleep set hours, you’ll sometimes go to bed when you aren’t sleepy enough. If it’s taking you more than five minutes to fall asleep each night, you aren’t sleepy enough. You’re wasting time lying in bed awake and not being asleep. Another problem is that you’re assuming you need the same number of hours of sleep every night, which is a false assumption. Your sleep needs vary from day to day.

If you sleep based on what your body tells you, you’ll probably be sleeping more than you need — in many cases a lot more, like 10-15 hours more per week (the equivalent of a full waking day). A lot of people who sleep this way get 8+ hours of sleep per night, which is usually too much. Also, your mornings may be less predictable if you’re getting up at different times. And because our natural rhythms are sometimes out of tune with the 24-hour clock, you may find that your sleep times begin to drift.

The optimal solution for me has been to combine both approaches. It’s very simple, and many early risers do this without even thinking about it, but it was a mental breakthrough for me nonetheless. The solution was to go to bed when I’m sleepy (and only when I’m sleepy) and get up with an alarm clock at a fixed time (7 days per week). So I always get up at the same time (in my case 5am), but I go to bed at different times every night.

I go to bed when I’m too sleepy to stay up. My sleepiness test is that if I couldn’t read a book for more than a page or two without drifting off, I’m ready for bed. Most of the time when I go to bed, I’m asleep within three minutes. I lie down, get comfortable, and immediately I’m drifting off. Sometimes I go to bed at 9:30pm; other times I stay up until midnight. Most of the time I go to bed between 10-11pm. If I’m not sleepy, I stay up until I can’t keep my eyes open any longer. Reading is an excellent activity to do during this time, since it becomes obvious when I’m too sleepy to read.

When my alarm goes off every morning, I turn it off, stretch for a couple seconds, and sit up. I don’t think about it. I’ve learned that the longer it takes me to get up, the more likely I am to try to sleep in. So I don’t allow myself to have conversations in my head about the benefits of sleeping in once the alarm goes off. Even if I want to sleep in, I always get up right away.

After a few days of using this approach, I found that my sleep patterns settled into a natural rhythm. If I got too little sleep one night, I’d automatically be sleepier earlier and get more sleep the next night. And if I had lots of energy and wasn’t tired, I’d sleep less. My body learned when to knock me out because it knew I would always get up at the same time and that my wake-up time wasn’t negotiable.

A side effect was that on average, I slept about 90 minutes less per night, but I actually felt more well-rested. I was sleeping almost the entire time I was in bed.

I read that most insomniacs are people who go to bed when they aren’t sleepy. If you aren’t sleepy and find yourself unable to fall asleep quickly, get up and stay awake for a while. Resist sleep until your body begins to release the hormones that rob you of consciousness. If you simply go to bed when you’re sleepy and then get up at a fixed time, you’ll cure your insomnia. The first night you’ll stay up late, but you’ll fall asleep right away. You may be tired that first day from getting up too early and getting only a few hours of sleep the whole night, but you’ll slog through the day and will want to go to bed earlier that second night. After a few days, you’ll settle into a pattern of going to bed at roughly the same time and falling asleep right away.

So if you want to become an early riser (or just exert more control over your sleep patterns), then try this: Go to bed only when you’re too sleepy to stay up, and get up at a fixed time every morning.

Edit (5/31/05):  Due to the (mysterious) popularity of this post, I’ve written a follow-up with some extra detail and clarifications: How to Become an Early Riser – Part II.  And if you really want to take sleep to the next level, read about my experiences with Polyphasic Sleep, where you only sleep 2-3 hours a day by taking 20-minute naps every few hours, around the clock.

Last Monday’s post How to Become an Early Riser obviously struck a chord with many people. That post has generated more links than I can count, sending more new traffic to this site than any other post or article I’ve written. And the traffic logs indicate that the surge was decentralized (not attributable to a mention in any one major source).

You can get an idea of what that post did for StevePavlina.com’s traffic at Alexa (note the big spike at the end of May 2005). Alexa isn’t very accurate, but it’s good enough for noting general trends.

Last Monday I did a Google search on “how to become an early riser” (in quotes). It returned zero results. Now look at how many results it returns.

OK, so this was an instalanche. But why? Getting up early is a relatively benign topic, isn’t it? At least I thought it was at the time I posted it.

Since this appears to be a topic of interest, even though I don’t fully understand why, I figured I’d do a follow up post to add some more detail.

First, on the subject of going to bed when you’re sleepy… to do this correctly requires a mixture of awareness and common sense.

If you’re doing stimulating activities before bed, you’ll be able to stay up later and stave off sleepiness for a while. In college I used to participate in poker games that went until dawn, and then we’d often go out to breakfast afterwards. I can easily stay up later than my normal range of bed times if I work, go out with friends, or do other stimulating activities.

But this isn’t what I meant by noticing when you’re sleepy. I mentioned the test of not being able to read more than a couple pages of text without losing concentration. This doesn’t mean waiting until you’re about to drop from exhaustion.

The onset of sleepiness I’m referring to is when your brain starts releasing hormones to knock you out. This is different from just being tired. You actually feel yourself getting drowsy. But in order for this to happen, you need to create the right conditions for it to occur. This means giving yourself some downtime before bedtime. I find that reading is a great way to wind down before bed. Some people say reading in bed is a bad idea… that you should only sleep in bed. I’ve never had a problem with it though, since when I’m too sleepy to keep reading, I can just put the book down and go to sleep. But read in a chair if you prefer.

Another test you can use is this. Ask yourself, “If I were to go to bed now, how quickly could I fall asleep?” If you think it would take more than 15 minutes to fall asleep, I say go ahead and stay up.

Once you set a fixed awakening time, it may take a bit of practice to hone in on the right range of bedtimes for you. In the beginning you may see some huge oscillations, staying awake too late one night and going to bed too early another night. But eventually you’ll get a feel for when you can go to bed and fall asleep right away while allowing yourself to wake up refreshed the next day.

As a failsafe to keep yourself from staying up too late, give yourself a bedtime deadline, and even if you aren’t totally sleepy, go to bed by that time no matter what. I have a good idea of the minimum amount of sleep I need. 6.5 hours per night is sustainable for me, but I can do 5 hours in a pinch and be OK as long as I don’t do it every night. The maximum I ever sleep is 7.5 hours. Before I started waking up at a fixed time each morning, I’d often sleep 8-9 hours, sometimes even 10 hours if I was really tired.

If you consume caffeine during the day, it’s likely to mess with your sleep cycles. So the original post assumes you aren’t drugging yourself to stay awake. If you’re addicted to caffeine, then break the addiction first. Don’t expect natural sleepiness to occur at the right time if you’re screwing with your brain chemistry.

The idea of the original post was to explain how to develop the habit of arising early. So the advice is geared towards creating the habit. Once the habit is established, it runs more subconsciously. You can be doing stimulating activities like work or playing video games, and you’ll just know when it’s time for you to go to bed, even though it may be a different time each night. The sleepiness test is important for developing the habit, but subtler signals will take over afterwards.

You can always sleep in late now and then if you need to. If I stay up until 3am, I’m not going to get up at 5am the next morning. But I’ll return to my usual routine the next day.

I recommend getting up at the same time for 30 days straight to lock in the habit, but after that you’ll be so conditioned to waking up at the same time that it will be hard to sleep in. I decided to sleep in late one Saturday morning and didn’t set my alarm, but I woke up automatically at 4:58 am. Then I tried to sleep in, but I was wide awake and couldn’t fall back asleep again. Oh well. Once the habit is established, it isn’t hard at all to get up, assuming you’re going to bed at the onset of sleepiness.

If you have kids, adapt as needed. My kids are ages 5 and 1. Sometimes they wake me up in the middle of the night — my daughter is in the habit of doing this lately, popping into the bedroom to tell my wife and me about her dreams or sometimes just to chat. And I know what it’s like when there’s a baby waking up every few hours. So if you’re in that situation, I say that the rule is to sleep when you can. Babies aren’t very good at sticking to schedules.

If you can’t get yourself out of bed when your alarm goes off, this is likely due to a lack of self-discipline. If you have enough self-discipline, you’ll get out of bed no matter what. Motivation can also help, but motivation is short lived and may only last a few days. Discipline is like a muscle. The more you build it, the more you can rely on it. Everyone has some discipline (can you hold your breath?), but not everyone develops it. There are a lot of ways to build discipline – you can read the whole six-part series on self-discipline to learn how.  Basically it comes down to taking on little challenges, conquering them, and gradually progressing to bigger ones. It’s like progressive weight training.  As your self-discipline gets stronger, a challenge like getting out of bed at a certain time will eventually become trivially easy.  But if your self-discipline has atrophied, it can seem an almost insurmountable hurdle.

Why get up early?

I’d say the main reason is that you’ll have a lot more time to do things that are more interesting than sleeping.

Again, I’ve gained about 10-15 hours per week doing this. That extra time is very noticeable. By 6:30am, I’ve already exercised, showered, had breakfast, and I’m at my desk ready to go to work. I can put in a lot of hours each day of productive work, and I’m usually done with work by 5:00 pm (and that includes personal “work” like email, paying bills, picking up my daughter from preschool, etc). This gives me 5-6 hours of discretionary time every evening for family, leisure activities, Toastmasters, reading, journaling, etc. And best of all, I still have energy during this time. Having time for everything that’s important to me makes me feel very balanced, relaxed, and optimistic.

Think about what you could do with that extra time. Even an extra 30 minutes per day is enough to exercise daily, read a book or two each month, maintain a blog, meditate daily, cook healthy food, learn a musical instrument, etc. A small amount of extra time each day adds up to significant amounts over the course of a year. 30 minutes a day is 182.5 hours in a year. That’s more than a month of working full-time (40 hours per week). Double it if you save 60 minutes a day, and triple it if you save 90 minutes a day. For me the savings was about 90 minutes/day. That’s like getting a free bonus year every decade. I’m using this time to do things that I previously didn’t have the time and energy to do. It’s wonderful.



