POWER OF MINDFULNESS

four sources of power in bare attention
    1 the functions of "tidying" and "naming"
        tidying up the mental household
        naming

    2 the non-coercive procedure
        obstacles to meditation
        three countermeasures

    3 stopping and slowing down
        keeping still
        spontaneity
        slowing down
        subliminal influences

    4 directness of vision
        the force of habit
        associative thought
        the sense of urgency
        the road to insight

WIKIPEDIA Anapanasanti
    "mindfulness of breathing"
    form of buddhist meditation
    to feel the sensations caused by the movements of the breath in the body, as is practiced in the context of mindfulness

    origins in buddhism
        core meditation practice in theravada, tiantai, chan, zen

        The Anapanasati Sutta specifically concerns mindfulness of inhalation
        and exhalation, as a part of paying attention to one's body in
        quietude, and recommends the practice of ānāpānasati meditation as a
        means of cultivating the seven factors of awakening: sati
        (mindfulness), dhamma vicaya (analysis), viriya (persistence), which
        leads to pīti (rapture), then to passaddhi (serenity), which in turn
        leads to samadhi (concentration) and then to upekkhā (equanimity).

        anapanasati has been used as a basis for developing meditative
        concentration (samadhi) until reaching the state and practice of full
        absorption (jhana). It is the same state reached by the Buddha during
        his quest for Enlightenment.

    the practice
        traditional sources

        modern sources

        active breathing, passive breathing

        scientifically demonstrated benefits

    stages of anapanasanti

Anapanasanti sutra

Kesa Sutra  Translation
DAISAI GEDAPPUKU
MUSO FUKUDEN E
HIBU NYORAI KYO
KODO SHOSHU JO

How great the robe of liberation
A formless field of merit
Wrapping ourselves in Buddha's teaching
We free all beings

----

The standard assertion of Buddhism is that by wiping away the cobwebs of
ignorance typified by the three poisons of greed, anger, and delusion what
remains is the Buddha nature which answers the question of appolonios above but
my question is somewhat more philosophical. The Dalai Lama has been carrying on
an open discussion with the scientific community with the mind and life
institute being a prime example. He has stated that the nature of reality is
open to story telling and that the framework of material existence has some
merit as a partial frame for a discussion of how pragmatic empiricism might
tease out the connections between the physical world and the vital and mental
worlds. Thannissaro Bikkhu sounds like many people I hear in the Buddhist
community who may be engaged in a skillful means exercise but do an injustice
to those of us who see the mind as an instrument of perception that is
disciplined by the rigors of philosophical debate like what is happening at the
mind and life institute. B. Alan Wallace has just published a book "Meditations
of a Buddhist Skeptic" which I heartily recommend to those with the scientific
background to appreciate the subtleties involved in the East/West encounter
that is part of the beginnings of a new science. Another book by the 1998 Nobel
laureate in physics, Robert B. Laughlin "A Different Universe: Reinventing
Physics from the Bottom Down" has a new take on theorizing that sounds very
much like dependent origination. Within Hinduism the is a yoga called jnana
yoga that is not for everyone. It is a yoga of the mind that delves deeply into
epistemological issues that might be too difficult for most people. I think
Buddhism's encounter with western science is fomenting a revolution in Buddhist
epistemology and is shaking the foundations of Western science. It is something
every educated Buddhist should have at a passing awareness of.
-----

