[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers viaanonymous FTP or COOMBSQUEST gopher on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU orANU Soc.Sci.WWW Server at http://coombs.anu.edu.au/CoombsHome.html]The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given inthe coombspapers top level INDEX files][Last updated: 2 May 1994]----------------------------------------------------------------------"DEATH IS A SACRAMENT".This text addresses some of the most fundamental and delicatereligious issues. Therefore, it should be read, quoted andanalysed in a mindful way.The text was originally published in MMC Summer 1993 pp 1-6. Allcopyrights to this document belong to Subhana Barzaghi Sensei,Kuan-Yin Zen Center, NSW, AustraliaEnquiries: The Editor, "Mind Moon Circle", Sydney Zen Centre, 251Young St., Annandale, Sydney, NSW 2038, Australia. Tel: + 61 26602993----------------------------------------------------------------------Death is a SacramentSUBHANA Barzaghi SenseiSubhana's talk, dedicated to the memory of Father Bede Griffiths,was given at Spring Sesshin 1993, Gorrick's Run Zendo.Immediately we start to speak about death in our culture, itconjures up all kinds of images of something morbid or depressingor tragic or painful, Our Western culture is particularly good athiding death and making it something alien. We immediately coverup a corpse and lock it behind closed doors, cover it over with asterile sheet, in some ways denying death's relevance to life.There is such a great fear of extinction that we treat death assomething taboo. We live with this anxiety about death, as if itis a denial of our rights to continual and perpetualself-determination.My first early experience around death was certainly not apleasant one. I was working as a nurse at the Lorna HodgkinsonSunshine Home in Sydney. I normally looked after children Ñ award of twenty-eight unruly mentally retarded boys Ñ but on oneoccasion I was transferred to the geriatric ward and I wasrostered to a mentally retarded patient there who was dying. Ithink I was rostered because nobody else wanted to take care ofhim. When I went in there he could barely speak and state hisneeds. The smell was repulsive: everything came out in the bed;there was excretion everywhere. I did not know how to relate tothis situation at all: I was twenty-one. As the days went on hebecame worse and he died. I felt that this was a very tragic andrepulsive way to die because I had no way of meeting thisperson's needs or even communicating with him. I felt totallyinadequate. I went straight to the matron's office and said, 'Ifyou don't transfer me back to the children's ward, you're goingto have one less nurse on Monday morning.' In those days, I don'tthink we were prepared for death or how to deal with it Ñ Icertainly wasn't prepared, in any way.Many years later I had another experience, completely differentfrom that. When I was a midwife for seven years, deliveringbabies at home, on one occasion I was assisting some dearfriends. The labour was not progressing well and was showingobvious signs that the woman and the labour needed attention. Sowe transferred her to the hospital. During the pushing stage onecould tell that there was something not quite right. The pushingstage was very, very difficult for her, unlike other situationsthat I had been in, so we picked up on something on an energeticlevel. When they tried to find the baby's heartbeat on themonitor, there was no heartbeat. That is not uncommon at thatstage of labour: when the baby is so far down in the birth canal,one cannot always pick up the heartbeat. Nevertheless the doctoralso somehow felt that he must get this baby out. When the babywas born, it was dead.The father, who had done a lot of work on himself, was a veryinteresting person, very spontaneous. He just let out an almightyscream that went right through the hospital. The nurse burst intotears and ran out of the room. The doctor cleaned up and didn'tknow what to say. So there we were. I was with this couple andthis dead baby. What we decided to do was just walk right out ofthe hospital. We took the baby with us. Nobody was going to stopus Ñ they didn't know how to respond anyway. We got into theirvan and drove off someplace in the middle of the night and we allsat there in the van and passed round the dead baby and startedsinging to the baby and speaking to the baby. Of course there wasa huge amount of tears and enormous grief, but I was also amazed,in looking at this baby's face, at how exquisitely peaceful itwas. So I had the most extreme emotions of incredible peace andat the same time extraordinary grief. I could not sleep for threedays; it was a very strange experience, a very beautifulexperience as well.These early experiences led me to question, what is death? Whenthe body dies, what remains? This is an important question, andwe take it up more fully in our miscellaneous koans. The koan is,"When you separate into earth, water, fire, and air, where do yougo?" Zen training and any truly deep religious experience shouldanswer these questions of life and death, or at least put to restsome of our fear. There are some parallels between deep sleep anddeath. Each night when we lie down to sleep we enter into ourdream world, our consciousness and our senses begin to fade, andthe world disappears; all the dramas and pleasures and successesand failures dissolve into the silence. Our attitude to sleep isto welcome deep sleep: it is a relief, it alleviates some of thestresses of the day. Yet we view death with such fear andanxiety.The apparent division between birth and death is not so total aswe imagine. The question is, who dies? What dies? In our practicethere is the small death of the body, and we may die a hundreddeaths without touching the great death of the mind. This greatdeath of the mind is very important. The death of the mind givesbirth to wisdom, and this wisdom is timeless, boundless state,right here and now, where there is no self to take refuge in.When we ask the question, who am I? or what am I? it is the Ithat is not known. What you are you must find out. In some ways,we can only describe what you are not. You are not the world; youare not even in the world. It is more like the world is in you.In Zen we call this experience, 'I alone and sacred in the wholeuniverse.' Another way of saying that is, 'Buddha-nature pervadesthe whole universe.' There is no separation there, and when wesay, 'I alone and sacred in the whole universe,' we do not meanthis self-important, self-conscious little 'I.'So death serves the deepest interests of a religious life, byreminding us of the emptiness of desires and plans andachievements and self-interest. It keeps us in check in some way.All of our competitiveness seems madness when we cannot takeanything with us. Our spiritual maturity and freedom lies in ourreadiness to let go of our self-importance.When I was in Los Angeles, maybe six years ago, I was giventickets to a really interesting play. It was called 'AIDS Us.' Itwas a play like no other play that I have ever been to. There wasa very small auditorium and there was no barrier between theactors and the people in the audience, no separation. All thepeople on stage had AIDS and they just got up and talked abouttheir lives, how extraordinarily different their lives had beensince they got AIDS. And instead of 'dying with AIDS' theyreframed it and thought of themselves as 'living with AIDS.' Itwas quite an extraordinarily empowering experience for thesepeople and the people in the audience. There wasn't a dry eye inthe house. And this was in the early days, when there was a lotof paranoia and misunderstanding about AIDS. At the end of theplay everybody from the audience just walked right down andeverybody hugged and greeted everybody else. There was a totalbreakdown of fear; there was no sense of alienation; everybodywas hugging everybody else. And that was a fairly straightaudience, and back in those days that was quite an amazingexperience for me. It was certainly my first contact with anyonewho had AIDS, and particularly a whole stageful of people. Theylater took that play to the White House to raise money for peoplewho had AIDS.There is interesting research now available about people'snear-death experiences. The chair of the Department ofParapsychology at Bristol University has done interviews withpeople who had near-death experiences. She explored them from arange of approaches, from the medical to the religious. Thebiological-medical argument is that the reason peopleconsistently see a great light at the end of a tunnel is becausethe brain is being starved of oxygen, and therefore everythinggoes dark; people thus experience something like going through atunnel and coming out to the light on the other side. Thisargument can explain why there is a tunnel, but it cannot explainwhy there is a light at the other end. They haven't got an answerfor that one! The researcher Ñ and she was taking a straightscientific approach Ñ said that maybe Buddhism had some answersthere, the best answers. Because Buddhism says that the self ismerely a construct and that we re-create the self over and overand over again, moment by moment. And at the time of death thephysical construct of the self starts to fall away: body and mindfalling away, that moment. And we can witness the great light, wecan witness the emptiness. And this also accounts for people'sconsistent experiences of the interconnected oneness with allthings in those near-death experiences.There is a range of beliefs about death that we may havesubscribed to at some point. The scientific view is that we liveonce; we die once; death is total extinction. This of course isvery rational, and there is no proof to support any other view,nothing else is available. The Christian view is that there islife after death; for those who find God, the kingdom of heavenis open for eternity; for those who reject God, there is hell foreternity; the earth is but a brief home, a testing ground for ourlove of God.A Buddhist view of death is that we are all waves on the ocean;each wave is born and dies repeatedly, according to ourunderlying forces; there is rebirth until enlightenment, until weget off the wheel of samsara. A variation of that is that thereis reincarnation, until the dissolution of the ego, when the soulbecomes one with the absolute. I am still not sure about any ofthose beliefs.Years ago, when I was at Kopan monastery, at the age of nineteen,I did my very first meditation retreat. I was naive enough tosign up for a thirty-day retreat. Kopan monastery is just outsideKathmandu in Nepal, and the lamas there, Lama Zopa and LamaYeshe, were wonderful teachers. For all beginning students theyused to make us meditate on death for two weeks. Then, if thatwas not enough, we would have to meditate on the hell realms fortwo weeks. We started out on that retreat with 150 people andabout thirty of us finished. They were always saying, 'The reasonwe get people to meditate on death is because it motivates peopleto practise.' I'm not sure about that! But, twenty years later, Ihave come around to thinking that the lamas had something thatwas important there: they weren't so eccentric and crazy as Ioriginally thought.Tibetan Buddhism focuses a lot on understanding the process ofdeath and dying. The lamas used to say that the moment of deathis potent with opportunity, because it is then that we haveaccess to the fundamental nature of mind. This luminous clearlight will manifest; it will naturally manifest. This is acrucial point, because it is also at that point that we canattain liberation. However, we usually do not recognise it,because we are not acquainted with it, here and now in ourpractice, in our daily lives. So they emphasise that it is rightnow in our practice, in this lifetime, that we must encounterthat unmanifested great mind, establish that essentialrecognition here and now.Just after that thirty-day retreat, I was getting on a plane toleave Kathmandu to go back to India. I had always had a childhoodfear that I was going to die young: I carried that fear with mealmost every day. I know some of you here also have that fear.That morning I woke up and I thought, 'Well, I'm going to die.'Instead of saying to myself, as I would usually say, 'Oh Subhana,don't be so paranoid, so depressive,' after meditating on deathfor two weeks up in Kopan monastery, I thought, 'Well, OK, I'lljust go with it.' So I decided that every single thing I did thatday should be complete in itself. Every movement Ñ lifting thearm, bringing it back Ñ was complete; there was death in thatmoment. Drinking my tea: that was the last moment I was going todrink a cup of tea. Eating my toast: that was the last time. Sothere was an incredible preciousness about each and every thing.And it took an incredibly long time to pack my bag Ñ I thoughtmaybe I was stalling too, about getting on that plane.Eventually in the afternoon I got on the plane: it took me allday to get there. We were in a light aircraft, going through aturbulent cloud formation out of Kathmandu; the little plane wasbouncing all over the place. I thought, 'This is just like mylife: being in one endless turbulent cloud formation, bouncing upand down all over the place.' Then in the next moment the planecame through into an open blue sky, very clear; you could see thepatchwork fields of India below. And although it was not anawakening experience, it gave me hope and inspiration. It gave mea glimpse that maybe there is something that does not die, thatcannot be destroyed, and every now and then we get a glimpse ofit. That there is something greater that contains all this.Another reason the Tibetan lamas would say why it was soimportant to meditate on death and the hell realms was because itgave a story, an explanation, about the six realms of existence.These are the Tushita heaven or heavenly realms; the demigods;the human realms; the animal realms; the hungry ghosts, or demonsand spirits, or Preta realms; and the hell realms. The lamaswould say that it was so precious to be born in the human realm.If you are in the hell realms there is so much pain and sufferingthat one can only survive; all one can do is cope with the pain.So in the hell realms there is no spirit of inquiry forrealisation, to attain the Way. The same with the other extremeof the heavenly, blissful realm. It is so blissful, so pleasant,we are having such a good time being blissed out, that there isno inquiry in that realm either. The human realm was alwaysconsidered the middle path, the middle realm, where there is abalance of pleasure and pain. It enables us to explore moredeeply into the meaning of life. You can think of 'realms';sometimes I find it more helpful to think of them as states ofmind rather than realms. We can go through those states of mindeven in one day, here in sesshin. If we translate the realms tothe now, this middle realm is a balance of pleasure and pain:don't get stuck in heaven! That is not the Way. Some equanimityis the middle ground, is the perfect ripe place for awakening themind.When we think of birth and death we encounter the concept ofkarma. I was recently reading 'The Tibetan Book of Living andDying', by Sogyal Rinpoche. He gives a lovely metaphor aboutkarma and rebirth that I thought I would like to share with you.I always stayed right away from the concept of karma. Somehow Icould never get my head around it, how to put it all together.Sogyal illustrates it in the following example.The successive existences in a series of rebirths are not likethe pearls of a pearl necklace, where they are held together on athread all the way through, like a permanent soul. It is not likethat, he says: it is more like a series of dice or blocks, allpiled one on top of the other, one supporting the other. There isno identity between each block, but they are functionallyconnected. One functionally supports the other. It is more likethat than it is like a permanent self or permanent soul runningthrough all existences. There is only conditionality between theblocks.If we apply that understanding right now, to this very moment,right now, we have a whole series of mind-moments, a whole seriesof consciousnesses. There is seeing, there is hearing, there isthinking, there is feeling. There are just these moments ofconsciousness, functionally connected. We just sit with thatawareness, that empty awareness. There is no permanent self thatthreads itself through all that. We just hear it arising andpassing away, each moment, right here. When we stay with thatseries of mind-moments Ñ and they happen so fast; the mind ishappening at an incredible pace, seeing, hearing, thinking,feeling - we notice the impermanence. We are very aware of theconstant flux and change. Impermanence has many gifts, but itsgreatest gift lies buried deep inside. The fear of impermanencethat awakens in us, the fear that nothing is real, that nothinglasts, is in fact a great friend. Because it drives us to ask thequestion, If everything dies and changes, what is truth? Is theresomething beyond the impermanent appearances of life? Is theresomething that survives all the deaths of the world, all the manychanges? There are vast implications in this fundamental fact ofimpermanence. When we truly see into impermanence, we can seeinto the empty nature of things and we can also see that it isnot-self. These three faces of the truth Ñ impermanence,emptiness, and not-self Ñ  are right there in each moment.Many times a friend dying can also give us a glimpse of thistimeless, boundless reality. There is such an energy aroundbirth; there is also a wonderful energy around death, aroundsomeone dying. It can awaken something in us. When someone isdying, everyone around that person has an opportunity to betouched by that life-death-life nature. It is a very preciousopportunity. Life and death are not opposing enemies, but arecomplementary within the totality. When we are in touch with thatwe are touching this death-less, this change-less, that bringsdeep peace. But most of the time we do not bother to be consciousof our mortality and the cessation of all that we have known orlived for or loved or worked for. None of us can say how we willrelate to our impending death. But if we live more conscious ofdeath, right now, in each moment, we might greet the dawn and thebird and the stars at night with a lot more presence andimmediacy. Life is nothing but a perpetual fluctuation of birth,death, rebirth. Death exposes itself each moment. Even in asingle thought there is a beginning, middle, and end of thethought. There is a beginning, middle, and end of a breath. Thereis the sound of the bird that returns to the silence. So thismoment is birth, this moment is death. This moment is rebirth,this moment is deathless. Can we embrace it like that?A book that everybody seems to be reading at the moment, 'Womenwho Run with the Wolves', by Clarissa Pincola Estes, has adescription of Skeleton Woman. She says that if we embody the oldwise woman she welcomes death to her heart, death to her fire.She knows death as life-giver, as death-dealer. And womenunconsciously practise these cycles of birth, death, and renewalevery month, through the constant cycles of the filling andemptying of our life blood: every moon cycle. The cycles oSkeleton Woman flow deep through our bodies, throughout ourentire life. This is indeed a series of births and deaths. But ifwe hold on to life with fear of death, o losing our car, ourhouse, our friends, our children, this fear creates somethinglike dead fingernails in the mind. The essential life and lovecan never leave you because you are that.. And when we awake wehold to nothing. It is neither conscious nor unconscious. It isthat pure heart of awareness. It is that true nakedness beyondall appearance. Everything exists in its light. The essence ofawareness neither dies nor is reborn. It is this changelessreality. And life and death then are married in the emptiness. Inthe Hekiganroku, Case 3, 'Great Master Baso is unwell,' thismaster is dying and the head monk asks him, 'How is yourreverence feeling these days?' And the great master says,'Sun-faced Buddha, moon-faced Buddha.' What did he mean?'Sun-faced Buddha, moon-faced Buddha.' This man is dying. Whetherhe is sick or well, the master is at peace. In other words, hesees all experience as Buddha-nature.When I was in San Francisco a couple of years ago I had awonderful opportunity. I was visiting John Tarrant Roshi andstaying with Governor Jerry Brown, an ex-Jesuit. One night hesaid, 'There is a remarkable man over at Berkeley: why don't wego and meet him?' The man's name was Father Bede Griffith: someof you may have met him or know of him. He was a Christian priestwho lived in India for something like thirty years, and whoseemed to be able to assimilate all kinds of practices in hisashram. When they were chanting, one minute it was Buddhistchanting, the next minute Hindu, the next minute Christian. Hewould include all of these things. We went to the No Gate ZenCentre in Berkeley. There was a small Zen sesshin happeningdownstairs, with a Zen teacher giving a talk. We trudged upstairsto meet Father Bede Griffith. When we walked in, he was sittingon his bed. He was quite old and not very well and could not walkeasily. He was dressed in his orange loincloth, which he wearsall the time. He was a wonderful little old man, with silveryhair and a long white beard. Jerry happened to ask him a reallyinteresting question. He said, 'What is death?' And Father BedeGriffith all of a sudden became excited and brighteyed and filledwith joy and enthusiasm, and said, 'Death is a sacrament. I amcompletely looking forward to my death.' I was sitting right nextto him on the bed and I was stunned. I never met anyone with suchan enthusiasm for death, and such joy and love for death. 'I amcompletely looking forward to my death.' His attitude about deathmeant that he was living life to its fullest. His gift of no fearis the greatest gift we can give to ourselves or to others. Whenwe give this gift then life is a sacrament, we meet life to itsfullest.May all beings receive the gift of no fear.----------------------------------------------------------------------end of file