This document was originally distributed on Internet as a part of the 
Electronic Buddhist Archives, available via anonymous FTP on the node 
COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU

The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given in the 
coombspapers top level INDEX file.

This version of the document has been reformatted by Barry Kapke and is 
being distributed, with permission, via the DharmaNet Buddhist File 
Distribution Network.

[Last updated: 29 September 1993]
----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        "YUNMEN'S BRIGHT LIGHT".
[this text was first published in the MIND MOON CIRCLE, Summer 1991 pp 
6-10]

This text addresses some of the most fundamental and delicate religious 
issues. Therefore, it should be read, quoted and analysed in a mindful 
way.

All copyrights to this document belong to Ross Bolleter Sensei, Zen 
Center of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia
Enquiries: The Editor, "Mind Moon Circle", Sydney Zen Centre, 251 Young 
St., Annandale, Sydney, NSW 2038, Australia. Tel: + 61 2 660 2993
----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         YUNMEN'S BRIGHT LIGHT
                         ROSS BOLLETER, Sensei
                              Spring 1991


Yunmen gave instruction saying, "Everyone has their own light. If you 
want to see it you can't. The darkness is dark, dark. Now what is your 
light?"

He himself answered, "The storeroom. The gate." Again he said, "It would 
be better to have nothing that to have something good."

Although Yunmen was a student of Hsueh Feng he was in fact enlightened 
by the ancient and eccentric teacher Mu-Chou (Chen Tsun-Su). It is said 
that Mu-Chou lived alone in a hut near the high road travelled by monks 
when they were going on pilgrimage from monastery to monastery. Mu-Chou 
would make grass sandals and leave them on the side of the road so that 
monks could replace their old worn out footwear. Mu-Chou was most 
secretive about this and it took years to find out who was responsible 
for the generous actions.

Mu-Chou's teaching methods were extremely rough, utterly abrupt. It is 
said that he would listen to the sound of the footsteps of approaching 
monks and if they didn't indicate the Way he would refuse to open his 
door. Yunmen came to him twice and Mu- Chou refused to open the door; 
the third time, Yunmen succeeded in getting his foot in. Mu-Chou grabbed 
him and urged him, "Speak! Speak!" As Yun-men was about to say 
something, Mu-Chou threw him out, slammed the door on him, breaking one 
of his legs. The intense pain awakened Yunmen instantly.

Yunmen went on to become a great teacher with over sixty enlightened 
disciples, unwittingly becoming the founder of the Yunmen School which 
lasted into the thirteenth century in China until it was absorbed into 
the Linchi (Rinzai) School. The Yunmen school was responsible for the 
creation and preservation of some of the great masterpieces of Ch'an 
literature in this period, including the book of one hundred koans 
entitled The Blue Cliff Record. from which this case is taken Apart from 
Yunmen's Bright Light, there are thirteen other koans which have Yunmen 
as their protagonist in The Blue Cliff Record.

Yunmen's style is splendidly incisive and he became celebrated for his 
one word responses, which became known as "The One Word Barrier".

     A monk asked, "What is the straight path to Yunmen Mountain?"
     Yunmen replied, "Chi'in!" (intimacy)      (1)

     A monk asked Yunmen, "What are the words that transcend the Buddha
     and the Patriarchs?"
     Yunmen said, "Kobyo!" (sesame rice cake) (2)

     A monk asked Yunmen, "What is Buddha?"
     Yunmen said, "Kanshiketsu!" (dried shitstick) (3)

With "Ch'in!", "Kobyo!", "Kanshiketsu", Yunmen vividly reveals the Great 
Way. He uses words in a way utterly unclouded with notions and concepts 
of meaning or no-meaning. The One Word Barrier, while powerful and 
penetrating, is never merely rough, and the spirit of his way is lofty 
yet accomodating; uncompromising, yet utterly generous.

Yunmen said to the assembly, "Within heaven and earth, in the midst of 
the cosmos, there is one treasure hidden in the body. Holding a lantern 
it goes towards the Buddha hall. It brings the great triple gate and 
puts it on the lantern." (4)

A monk asked, "What is the roar of the earthen ox on top of the snow 
ridge?"
Yunmen replied, "Heaven and earth darkened red." (5)

There is weird splendour in these koans which show the unclouded depths 
of Yunmen's vision as poet and Zen teacher. Yuan Wu in his comment on 
"Yunmen's One Treasure" in The Blue Cliff Record says if Yunmen,"by 
means of unconditional compassion he acts unasked as an excellent 
friend!" (6)


Yunmen said that if we want to see our light, we can't. When we turn 
inward to see the source of our being, to discover the light of self- 
nature, everything is dark and there is nothing to be seen. Searching 
inwardly for our true self is like the eye trying to look at itself, 
like the sun trying to shine on the sun.

In this condition the darkness is dark, dark. If we look at this from 
one angle, this seems to be the darkness of a dead end where our whole 
enterprise seems to have foundered in despair and delusion. Yet this 
condition, no less than opening fresh eyes to the Morning Star, or 
sighting distant peach blossoms, is the Way itself, conveying our 
essential nature. When the practice feels dry and fruitless and we seem 
to scoop from the same empty waterhole, when "the tree withers and the 
leaves fall", (7) we find everything right there.

If we continue to practise and to carry the koan in the place where "the 
darkness is dark, dark," then inside and outside become one; there is no 
gap between self and other and there is nowhere to search. This is a 
familiar place in practice and is referred to over and over again in Zen 
literature. Here is Bassui Zenji, a 14th century Japanese Rinzai 
teacher, whose natural koan was "Who is (the Master of) hearing that 
sound?", showing how to work with this condition:

At last every vestige of self-awareness will disappear and you will feel 
like a cloudless sky. Within yourself you will find no "I", nor will you 
discover anyone who hears. This Mind is like the void, yet it hasn't a 
single spot that can be called empty. Do not mistake this state for 
self-realisation, but continue to ask yourself even more intensely, "Now 
who is it that hears?" If you bore and bore into this question, 
oblivious to anything else, even this feeling of voidness will vanish 
and you won't be aware of anything - total darkness will prevail. (Don't 
stop here, but ) keep asking with all your strength, "What is it that 
hears?" Only when you have completely exhausted the questioning will the 
question burst; now you will feel like a person that has come back from 
the dead. This is true realisation. You will see the Buddhas of all the 
Universes face to face and the Patriarchs past and present. (8)

Even when our resources are utterly depleted we don't give up but 
steadily return to the koan using all the energy we have at that time, 
but not straining, not forcing. For Bassui it was "Who is it who 
hears?", for us it is most likely to be Mu, but the procedure is the 
same, the same light, steady, unfaltering vigilance.

The vigil of working with the koan and the koan working with us prepares 
the ground, and in the most fundamental sense, is the ground of 
realisation. In that deepened condition, unknowingly we ready ourselves 
and any spark can light up the cave. For Yunmen it was the pain of his 
leg being broken by the door as Mu-Chou slammed it; for Wu-men it was 
the sound of the drum announcing the noonday meal; for Ling-Yun, after 
thirty years of practice, it was the sight of the pink blossoms of 
distant peach trees; for Kyogen it was the sound of the stone striking 
the bamboo - "duk".

"The storeroom. The gate." For Yunmen these are our lights and when we 
are ready and utterly open they shine with our true nature. Not only the 
storehouse, the gate, but the star and the wattle, the drunk enveloping 
us with his beery breath at the party, the shit in the toilet; all these 
are our own lights. And not only the sharp and crystalline calls of the 
world, but also the boring, the infuriating and the painful voices that 
arise in our zazen; all the states and conditions which generate and 
compose our emotional weather; all the homeless and rejected parts of 
the self that cry out and long to take us in and be taken in, to give 
and receive refuge. These too, with the store house, the gate, our own 
own lights.

However, if we search for our true nature in the world of colour and 
form we can't find it. Searching for the flower, the star, the 
storeroom, the gate that will be the agent of our enlightenment is as 
futile as the inward introspective search for our own light. If we try 
to turn towards it, we deviate. Seen one way, our trying cannot discover 
or confirm our own bright light; from the other side the searching and 
striving is itself the whole matter. This is conveyed in a telling and 
lovely way in the first of Tosotsu's Three Barriers:

The purpose of going to abandoned, grassy places and doing zazen is to 
search for my self-nature. Now, at such a time, where is my self 
nature?" (9)

The lonely figure that searches in the undergrowth provides its light no 
less than the storeroom, the gate.

"It would be better to have nothing than to have something good. In 
saying this, Yunmen warns us against clinging to enlightenment and 
getting caught up with attainment; better, he says, to live without a 
trace of have and have not, then the planes roar through, the birdsong 
penetrates everywhere, we laugh and cry, get up, forget to get up, make 
love, put on clothes, go to the beach, get born, die; all this without 
the impediments of ownership. However, unfortunately, there is no 
trouble in recognising whose telephone bill it is when it lands on the 
hall table!

Again, in saying, "It would be better to have nothing than to have 
something good", Yunmen warns us not to go on clinging to his words. 
There are grave dangers in utilising "The storeroom, the gate" or "dried 
shitstick, or "sesame rice cake" as mechanical koan responses that 
neither illuminate the Way or succeed in propping up the gate. Better to 
show the whole empty universe in our silence than to formally reiterate 
his words. One moment their flash illuminates the whole world, the next 
we drag them around like carcases. Even worse, they get handed onto 
others. Once is enough. Enough is enough.
 
Yunmen refused to allow his listeners to take notes during his talks. 
"What is the use of recording my words and tying up your tongues?" he is 
said to have cried as he chased away those who wanted to memorise his 
sayings. It is thanks to Hsian-lin Ch'eng-Yuan who dressed himself in a 
paper robe and wrote down Yunmen's sayings and dialogues on it, that we 
have the substantial collection of koans and stories that nourish Zen 
practice in our times. (10)

In the flickering, unsteady darkness of the practice we come up to the 
gate a thousand times and judder at the final step. Likewise the 
Universe itself presents the whole matter over and over again till 
ordinary things gleam with the allure of our self-nature.

As practice deepens we just accept the fear and hesitation as we come up 
to the gate but don't go through; on each occasion we just resume our 
vigil with the koan. In time, the "inner" world of yearning and striving 
and the "outer" world of 'the storeroom and the gate" fall into deeper 
and deeper affinity. Unaided, the Way is seeking the Way.

Yunmen speaks of us wanting to see our own light: Rilke, the great 
German poet of the early twentieth century whose later work (especially 
the Ninth Duino Elegy) inhabits a realm which has a considerable overlap 
with Zen, leans on the other side when he writes of the yearning of 
things for us to notice and include them:

Yes, the springtimes needed you. Often a star was waiting for you to 
notice it. A wave rolled towards you out of the distant past, or as you 
walked under an open window, a violin yielded itself to your hearing 
.....(11).

This is the fleeting world that needs us and in some strange way keeps 
calling to us, as Rilke puts it, the most fleeting of all. (12) As we 
yearn and search, so too do the star, the wave, the violin. The fleeting 
world shines out moment by moment as the fallen jacaranda blossoms 
staring up from the back lawn, the cark cark of the crows, the son or 
daughter arguing back, challenging our authority - each calls out to be 
included.

We find this calling, this beckoning in our tradition when in the first 
Oxherding picture, the herdsman is fruitlessly searching for the Ox 
(which in the series of ten pictures depicting particular stages on the 
Way, stands for the Mind of Realisation). It is evening and the herdsman 
is exhausted and unable to find any trace of the Ox, hearing only the 
cicadas in the trees.

The cicadas chirp chirp with all their might; the Ox is right there, but 
the herdsman is not ready for this and the journey and the search for 
refuge continue. Yet the cicadas continue to call and, moment after 
moment, each thing longs to be included; the cat comes up to the back 
door for its evening meal, someone turns on a radio next door. Events 
scuffle, jostle to be taken in. "Here I am!" they shout.

Dogen saw this clearly when he wrote: "The Dharma wheel turns from the 
beginning. There is neither surplus nor lack. The whole universe is 
moistened with nectar, and the truth is ready to harvest." (13)

When we accept the invitation, the self and the Universe find refuge 
when there is no self, no other. In this realm, all beings are saved, as 
they have been from the beginning. When Shakyamuni having sat all night 
under the Bodhi tree looked up and saw the Morning Star with fresh eyes, 
the Morning Star, no less than Shakyamuni, found its true home: each was 
the other's own bright light.

Yunmen put it this way: "Medicine and sickness mutually correspond to 
each other. The whole universe is medicine. What is the self?" In asking 
what is the self, Yunmen is asking a similar question to "What is our 
own light?"

The night is full of cicadas; the fan hums loudly, shivering stars cover 
the sky at midnight; we sit nodding off, turning back over and over 
again to the koan. Depth calls to depth. Each person, each being, each 
thing longs to be included.

At such a time, what is our own light?



References

1. Chang Chung-Yuan, Original Teachings of Ch'an Buddhism (Vintage 
Books, Random House, New York, 1971, p. 268.

2. Yamada and Aitken (transl) Ihe Blue Cliff Record. Case 77, 
(unpublished ms).

3. Yamada and Aitken (transl) Mumonkan, Case 21 (unpublished ms).

4. Yamada and Aitken, The Blue Cliff Record, Case 62 (unpublished ms).

5. Chang Chung-Yuan, ibid, p 293.

6. Cleary, Thomas and J.C. (transl) The Blue Cliff Record (Shambhala, 
Boulder and London, 1977) Case 62, p. 400.

7. Yamada and Aitken (transl) The Blue Cliff Record, Case 27, "Unmon's 
Manifestation" .

8. Bassui Zenji, "The Talk on One Mind" from Kapleau, Philip (ed), The 
Three Pillars of Zen (Anchor Books, Doubleday, Garden City, New York, 
1980) p. 272.

9. Yamada and Aitken (transl), Mumonkan, Case 37.

10. Chang Chung-Yuan, ibid, p. 267.

11. Rilke, R.M., "The First Duino Elegy" from Mitchell, Stephen (trans), 
The Selected Poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke, Vintage Books, Random House, 
New York, 1984), p. 151.

12. Mitchell, Stephen (transl) ibid, p 199 (from the Ninth Duino Elegy).

13. Aitken Roshi, Robert, The Mind of Clover (North Point Press, San 
Francisco, 1984).
----------------------------------------------------------------------
end of file
